                                                 Dense Neural Networks are not Universal Approximators

                                                                   Levi Rauchwerger1 , Stefanie Jegelka2,3 , and Ron Levie4
                                                                                  1 Princeton University, Dept of CS
                                                                                   2 MIT, Dept of EECS and CSAIL
                                                                               3 TUM, School of CIT, MCML, MDSI
                                                                             4 Technion – IIT, Faculty of Mathematics




arXiv:2602.07618v5 [cs.LG] 7 May 2026
                                                                                                    Abstract

                                                  We investigate the approximation capabilities of dense neural networks. While universal approximation theorems
                                              establish that sufficiently large architectures can approximate arbitrary continuous functions when there are no
                                              restrictions on the weights, we show that dense neural networks do not possess this universality. Our argument is
                                              based on a model compression approach, combining the weak regularity lemma with an interpretation of feedforward
                                              networks as message passing graph neural networks. We consider ReLU neural networks subject to natural constraints
                                              on weights and input and output dimensions, which model a notion of dense connectivity. Within this setting, we
                                              demonstrate the existence of Lipschitz continuous functions that cannot be approximated by such networks. This
                                              highlights intrinsic limitations of neural networks with dense layers and motivates the use of sparse connectivity as a
                                              necessary ingredient for achieving true universality.

                                        Keywords: Artificial Neural Networks, Dense Neural Networks, Neural Network Expressivity, Universal Approximation,
                                        Weak Regularity Lemma, Graph Neural Networks


                                        1    Introduction
                                        Deep neural networks are central to modern machine learning, driving advances in vision, language, and scientific
                                        applications [LeCun et al., 2015]. Recently, deep networks have grown increasingly large, enhancing their performance
                                        while increasing computational costs [Thompson et al., 2020], which motivates a focus on efficiency in both training
                                        and inference [Menghani, 2023]. One of the most prominent approaches to improving efficiency is the use of sparse
                                        neural networks. Sparse models can match or surpass dense ones in accuracy, using less energy, memory, and training
                                        time [Mocanu et al., 2018, Evci et al., 2020, Hoefler et al., 2021, Peste, 2023]. These properties have made sparsification
                                        methods such as pruning [LeCun et al., 1990, Medeiros and Barreto, 2007, Han et al., 2015, Lee et al., 2019] key in
                                        the use of deep networks on limited-resource devices and for lowering inference cost in large-scale systems [Cheng
                                        et al., 2018]. Strikingly, even pruning 80–90% of parameters often leaves generalization (measured by test error)
                                        unaffected [Frankle and Carbin, 2019]. Beyond efficiency, sparsity can enhance optimization at certain levels, act as a
                                        built-in regularizer, and reduce sensitivity to noisy data [He et al., 2022, Jin et al., 2022].

                                        These empirical evidences raise the possibility that denseness itself may impose intrinsic limitations. While neural
                                        networks are known to approximate broad function classes [Yarotsky, 2017], it remains unclear whether such guarantees
                                        persist under dense connectivity constraints. This motivates the following central question: Do dense deep neural
                                        networks have inferior expressivity?

                                        Our work focuses on the 𝐿 ∞ -approximation error for 1-Lipschitz continuous functions bounded by 1 on a 𝑑-dimensional
                                        domain. Within this setting, the approximation capabilities of neural networks have been extensively studied since the
                                        development of classical universal approximation theorems [Cybenko, 1989, Hornik, 1991]. A central result is that any
                                        Lipschitz continuous (or more generally continuous) function on a 𝑑-dimensional compact domain can be approximated
                                        to arbitrary accuracy 𝜖 > 0 by a sufficiently large ReLU network [Mhaskar, 1996, Pinkus, 1999]. Yarotsky [2017] gave
                                        explicit error bounds for approximating functions in Sobolev spaces of given smoothness using deep and shallow ReLU


                                                                                                        1
networks. Notably, Yarotsky [2017] provides rigorous upper and lower bounds on the number of weights required for a
given approximation error.

In contrast to prior work that studies the expressivity of general neural networks, we specifically investigate the
expressivity limits of dense networks. We consider dense networks whose weight matrices are uniformly bounded, with
both entrywise ℓ∞ control and normalized ℓ1 magnitude. These constraints enforce a strong form of denseness: nontrivial
outputs require contributions from many neurons, so dense connectivity reflects genuine collective computation rather
than a few dominating weights. By leveraging the graph structure of neural computation, we connect deep neural
networks to the broader class of graph neural networks [Gilmer et al., 2017a, Xu et al., 2019], for which a rich theoretical
framework has been developed [Levie, 2023, Rauchwerger and Levie, 2025, Böker et al., 2023, Rauchwerger et al., 2025,
Herbst and Jegelka, 2025, Finkelshtein et al., 2024, Kouchly et al., 2025] using dense graph limit theory [Lovász, 2012].
Our analysis builds on the so-called weak regularity lemma [Frieze and Kannan, 1999, László and Szegedy, 2007] to
obtain an implicit compression result, showing that – even as width increases (and depth is held fixed) – the expressive
power of dense networks saturates at a fixed resolution, thereby revealing intrinsic barriers that scaling alone cannot
overcome. Our theoretical framework is fundamentally different from both compression-based generalization analyses
[Arora et al., 2018] and optimization-based perspectives such as in [Jacot et al., 2018]. Instead, we study intrinsic
expressivity constraints of dense architectures, independent of training, generalization, or optimization dynamics,
by leveraging the precise characterizations provided by Yarotsky [2017] and structural graph-theoretic constraints
inherent to dense architectures. We are not aware of any prior work that uses compression to derive expressivity limits,
particularly for dense neural networks.

Contributions. We provide a theoretical account of a widely observed phenomenon: dense neural networks are
fundamentally less expressive than their sparse counterpart. Our results can be summarized as follows.

    1. Classical results achieve universality by allowing width to increase with the desired approximation accuracy. In
       contrast, we show that, under some conditions on the input dimension, dense networks of any fixed depth cannot
       exploit width alone to achieve universality; their expressive power saturates, revealing an inherent limitation of
       dense architectures (Theorem 9).

    2. Our proof technique is not only novel but also offers a broadly applicable framework for analyzing neural networks.
       We identify two primary ways this technique can be adopted:

          • General Approximation Method: The method can be generalized to any subclass of networks that admits
            a compression guarantee – specifically, where there exists a small, bounded class that approximates the
            original subclass.

          • Graph-Theoretic Perspective: By treating the neural network as a computational graph, our approach
            utilizes tools from GNN theory – specifically the regularity lemma – to study architectural properties. This
            provides a blueprint for using GNN theory, and specifically regularity theorems, to analyze other aspects of
            neural networks.

    3. As a byproduct, our analysis yields an implicit model compression scheme (Corollary 7) showing that every dense
       ReLU network can be approximated by a bounded-size network.


2     Preliminaries
Here, we provide graph-theoretic background, including kernels as a dense analogue of graphs [Lovász, 2012], introduce
Euclidean and graph networks, propose a formal “strong” notion of dense networks, and recall definitions of network
complexity and function approximation.

Graphs. For 𝑛 ∈ N, we write [𝑛] =: {1, . . . , 𝑛}. An attributed graph (or graph-signal) is a pair (𝐺, f), where 𝐺 is
a weighted directed graph with node set 𝑉 = [𝑛], edge set 𝐸 ⊆ 𝑉 × 𝑉, and adjacency matrix A := ( 𝐴𝑖, 𝑗 )𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] , and
f : 𝑉 → R is a node feature vector (signal). The signal assigns to each node 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 an attribute f (𝑣) ∈ R. Let 𝐵 > 0,
define a [−𝐵, 𝐵]-weighted graph as a graph with edge weights in [−𝐵, 𝐵].


                                                             2
Partitions. Let 𝜇 denote the Lebesgue
                                   Ð        measure on [0, 1]. A partition of [0, 1] is a sequence P𝑛 = {𝑃1 , . . . , 𝑃𝑛 } of
disjoint measurable sets such that 𝑛𝑗=1 𝑃 𝑗 = [0, 1]. The partition is an equipartition if 𝜇(𝑃𝑖 ) = 𝜇(𝑃 𝑗 ) for all 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛].
By I𝑛 , we denote the equipartition of [0, 1] into 𝑛 intervals. A partition Q𝑙 is called a refinement of P𝑘 if every 𝑄 ∈ Q𝑙
is a subset of some 𝑃 ∈ P𝑘 . The above definitions extend naturally to general intervals [𝑎, 𝑏] instead of [0, 1].

Kernels. Kernels generalize the idea of [−1, 1]-weighted adjacency matrices to the continuous set of nodes [0, 1]. An
attributed kernel (or kernel-signal) is a pair (𝐾, 𝑓 ), where 𝐾 is a kernel, i.e. a measurable function 𝐾 : [0, 1] 2 → [−1, 1],
and 𝑓 : [0, 1] → R is a measurable function called feature vector (or signal). By 1𝑆 , we denote                   the indicator function
of a set 𝑆. We call a kernel 𝐾 a step kernel w.r.t. a partition P𝑛 := {𝑃𝑖 }𝑖=1          𝑛 if 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) := Í
                                                                                                                𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] 𝑐 𝑖, 𝑗 1 𝑃𝑖 ×𝑃 𝑗 (𝑥, 𝑦)
for some choice of coefficients     {𝑐 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [−1,  1]} 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] . Similarly, we call  a signal    𝑓  a step signal     w.r.t. a partition
            𝑛 if 𝑓 (𝑥) := Í
P𝑛 := {𝑃𝑖 }𝑖=1                      𝑐 1     (𝑥) for some     choice   of coefficients {𝑐   ∈ R}         .
                             𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] 𝑖 𝑃𝑖                                                𝑖      𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]


Graph-Induced Kernels. Any [−𝐵, 𝐵]-weighted graph can be naturally associated with a kernel. Let 𝐺 be a
[−𝐵, 𝐵]-weighted graph with adjacency matrix A = { 𝐴𝑖, 𝑗 }𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] and signal f. Consider the equipartition I𝑛 = {𝐼 𝑘 } 𝑛𝑘=1
                                                                                        Í𝑛      𝐴𝑖, 𝑗
of [0, 1] into 𝑛 intervals.
                        Í𝑛 The kernel 𝐾𝐺 induced by 𝐺 is defined by 𝐾𝐺 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑖, 𝑗=1 𝐵 1𝐼𝑖 (𝑥)1𝐼 𝑗 (𝑦), with the
induced signal 𝑓f (𝑧) = 𝑖=1 f𝑖 1𝐼𝑖 (𝑧). This construction allows embedding the space of all graphs of all sizes into the
space of kernels,1 where approximation properties are more naturally formulated.

Cut Norm. The cut norm, a fundamental distance measure in graph theory, was introduced by Frieze and Kannan
[1999] and underpins the cut distance, which serves as the central notion of convergence in the theory of dense graph
limits [Lovász, 2012]. The cut norm of a measurable 𝐾 : [0, 1] 2 → R and a measurable f : [0, 1] → R are respectively
defined as                              ∫                                            ∫
                     ∥𝐾 ∥ □ = sup            𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦)𝑑𝑥𝑑𝑦      and ∥ 𝑓 ∥ □ := sup        𝑓 (𝑥)𝑑𝑥 .
                                    𝑈,𝑆 ⊂ [0,1]   𝑈×𝑆                                             𝑆 ⊆ [0,1]   𝑆

A distance between graphs can be defined as the norm of the difference between their induced kernels.

Neural Networks. Neural networks (NNs), also known as multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), process vector-valued
inputs in R𝑑0 using a collection of learnable parameters (or weights) (W, b). These consist of a sequence of weight
matrices W = (𝑊 (ℓ ) )ℓ=1    𝐿 , where 𝑊 (ℓ ) ∈ R 𝑑ℓ ×𝑑ℓ −1 , and a sequence of bias vectors b = (𝑏 (ℓ ) ) 𝐿 where 𝑏 (ℓ ) ∈ R 𝑑ℓ . We
                                                                                                          ℓ=1
call 𝐿 ∈ N the depth of the network and refer to each 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ 𝐿 as a layer. We call 𝑑ℓ ∈ N the width (or alternately the
dimension) of ℓ th layer and refer to each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑ℓ ] as a channel. Specifically, we call 𝑑0 and 𝑑 𝐿 the input and output
dimensions, respectively, and refer to each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑0 ] as an input channel and each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 𝐿 ] as an output       Í 𝐿 channel. The
tuple (𝐿, 𝑑0 , . . . , 𝑑 𝐿 ) is called the network architecture. The number of network parameters is 𝑊 := ℓ=1          𝑑ℓ · 𝑑ℓ −1 + 𝑑ℓ .
                                 𝐿+2 Í 𝐿−1
The network size is 𝑛 := 𝐿−1            ℓ=1 𝑑 ℓ , serving as an effective size parameter; the rationale  is given in Section  3.

Forward Propagation. We work throughout with a normalized parameterization in which each layer is scaled by a
global factor depending on the network architecture. Given parameters (W, b), the associated depth-𝐿 ReLU network
Θ (W,b) : R𝑑0 → R𝑑𝐿 is defined as follows. For an input x ∈ R𝑑0 , set h (0) := x. The activation of the first hidden layer
in channel 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑1 ] is
                                                                   𝑑0
                                                            1     ∑︁
                                      h𝑖(1) = ReLU­                   𝑊𝑖(1) h (0) + 𝑏 𝑖(1) ® .
                                                                                          ª
                                                                                                                       (1)
                                                    ©
                                                       𝑑0 (𝐿 + 2) 𝑗=1    𝑗    𝑗
                                                    «                                      ¬
For layers ℓ = 2, . . . , 𝐿 − 1 and channel 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑ℓ ],
                                                                    𝑑ℓ −1
                                                           ©1       ∑︁
                                              h𝑖(ℓ ) = ReLU­            𝑊𝑖(ℓ𝑗 ) h (ℓ −1)
                                                                                         + 𝑏 𝑖(ℓ ) ® .
                                                                                                  ª
                                                                                  𝑗                                                              (2)
                                                             𝑛      𝑗=1
                                                               «                                   ¬
The output is computed as in Equation (2) with ℓ = 𝐿, without ReLU. The network output is h (𝐿) = (h𝑖(𝐿) )𝑖=1     𝑑𝐿
                                                                                                                     . The
different normalization in the first layer reflects that 𝑑0 and 𝑑 𝐿 are fixed in our asymptotic regime, while the effective
network size 𝑛 may grow arbitrarily.
   1 More accurately, the mapping from graphs to kernels is not one-to-one, and introduces equivalence classes of graphs that induce the same kernel.

We will see that two equivalent computational graphs define the same function.


                                                                            3
𝐵-Strongly Dense Networks. When weights are unconstrained, the normalized parameterization (in Equations (1)
and (2)) does not limit generality, since any global scaling can be absorbed into the layer weights. However, under
uniform weight bounds, it has structural consequences: it forces any nontrivial network—any network that does not map
all inputs to near-zero outputs—to be dense: meaningful feature propagation requires many neurons to be active. We
refer to this as a strong notion of denseness to distinguish it from weaker forms where a network might have many
non-zero weights that are nonetheless large enough to allow a few neurons to dominate the output.

Definition 1 (𝐵-Strongly Dense Network). Let 𝐵 > 0. A depth-𝐿 ReLU network Θ (W,b) is called a 𝐵-infinity normalized
(𝐵-IN) dense network, or more concisely, a 𝐵-strongly dense network, if its parameters satisfy |𝑊𝑖,(ℓ𝑗) | ≤ 𝐵 and
|𝑏 𝑖(ℓ ) | ≤ 𝐵, for all layers ℓ ∈ [𝐿], where 𝐵 is a constant independent of the network size 𝑛.

In such networks, each neuron contributes 𝑂 (1/𝑛) to the pre-activation, so no finite subset of neurons can dominate as
𝑛 → ∞. This contrasts with unbounded networks, where sparse representations with a few large weights remain possible.
The parameters and the architecture of such networks are referred to as dense parameters and dense architecture (with
weight bound 𝐵), respectively.

Graph and Kernel Neural Networks. Message passing graph neural networks (MPNNs) form a class of neural
networks designed to process graph-structured data by iteratively updating node embeddings through the exchange of
messages between nodes [Merkwirth and Lengauer, 2005, Gori et al., 2005, Xu et al., 2019, Gilmer et al., 2017b]. Levie
[2023], Rauchwerger and Levie [2025] extend this framework canonically to operate on kernels. Since our construction
is directly derived for kernels, we adopt their definitions. Unlike general trainable MPNNs, we consider the following
special predefined network.

𝐵-IR-MPNN. Let 𝐵 > 0 and 𝐿 ∈ N. We define the 𝐵-amplified integral-ReLU MPNN (𝐵-IR-MPNN) Φ 𝐵,𝐿 , with 𝐿
layers, as the following mapping from attributed kernels to node features. Given (𝐾, 𝑓 ), define Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓 ) := 𝑓 (𝐿) ,
where with 𝑓 (0) (𝑥) := 𝑓 (𝑥) and for ℓ ∈ [𝐿 − 1]:
                                                           ∫                        
                                    𝑓 (ℓ ) (𝑥) := 𝐵 · ReLU    𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦)𝑑𝑦 .                              (3)
                                                            [0,1]

The output is computed as in Equation (3) with ℓ = 𝐿, without ReLU. This definition is the canonical extension of
MPNNs from graphs to kernels. For the definition of MPNNs on graphs and the equivalency to MPNNs on kernels see
Appendix E.

Functions and Approximation. Our work focuses on the limitations of approximating Lipschitz continuous functions
[0, 1] 𝑑 → R via 𝐵-strongly dense ReLU networks. Let C(𝑑, 𝑑 ′ ) denote the space of all continuous functions mapping
              ′
[0, 1] 𝑑 to R𝑑 . The approximation error between two functions 𝑓 and 𝑔 is ∥ 𝑓 − 𝑔∥ ∞ = ess supx∈ [0,1] 𝑑 ∥ 𝑓 (x) − 𝑔(x) ∥ ∞ .
Here, the outer ∥ · ∥ ∞ denotes the supremum over the input domain [0, 1] 𝑑 , while the inner ∥ · ∥ ∞ denotes the standard ℓ∞
                                                                                                                    ′
norm on the output space (i.e., the maximum absolute value over coordinates). A function 𝑓 : [0, 1] 𝑑 → R𝑑 is called
𝐿-Lipschitz continuous if there exists a constant 𝐿 ≥ 0 such that ∥ 𝑓 (x) − 𝑓 (y) ∥ ∞ ≤ 𝐿 ∥x − y∥ ∞ for all x, y ∈ [0, 1] 𝑑 .
Denote the space of 1-Lipschitz continuous functions bounded by 1 as Lip(𝑑, 𝑑 ′ ).

Universal Approximation. A standard way to define the expressive power of a class of neural networks is via universal
approximation.

Definition 2. Let N N and F be two sets of measurable functions Ω → R𝑑 defined on the measure space Ω. We say
that N N is a universal approximator of F if for every 𝜖 > 0 and 𝑓 ∈ F there exists Θ ∈ N N such that
                                       ∥ 𝑓 − Θ∥ ∞ := ess sup ∥ 𝑓 (𝑥) − Θ(𝑥) ∥ ∞ < 𝜖 .
                                                          𝑥 ∈Ω


A classical result states that the class of neural networks with arbitrary width and predefined fixed depth is a universal
approximator of C(𝑑, 𝑑 ′ ) [Leshno et al., 1993, Mhaskar, 1996, Pinkus, 1999]. In our work, we take Ω = [0, 1] 𝑑0 , choose
N N to be a class of strongly dense neural networks (to be defined in Section 3) and show that it is not a universal
approximator of F = Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ).


                                                              4
Network Complexity and the VC Dimension. A classical way to formalize the complexity of a hypothesis class of
neural networks is through its VC-dimension. The VC-dimension, which quantifies the largest set of points in an input
space X that a hypothesis class H (a class of functions from X to {0, 1}) can shatter, i.e., realize all possible Boolean
labelings. If |{(ℎ(𝑥1 ), . . . , ℎ(𝑥 𝑚 )) : ℎ ∈ H }| = 2𝑚 , we say H shatters the set {𝑥 1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑚 }. The Vapnik–Chervonenkis
dimension of H , denoted VCdim(H ), is the size of the largest shattered set or ∞, if there is no such maximal set.

Note that our complexity measures are largely insensitive to the specific choice of piecewise linear activation function.
In fact, Yarotsky [2017], Proposition 1, shows that any such activation with finitely many breakpoints can be simulated
by ReLU networks with only a constant-factor increase in the number of units and weights. Thus, focusing on ReLU
does not entail any real loss of generality.


3      Deep Neural Networks as MPNNs
Deep networks are often described algebraically – through layers, weights, and nonlinearities. Yet there is another
perspective: every computation carried out by a network implicitly constructs a graph. Each node represents a feature
channel and its value an activation, while each edge encodes a single weight of a weight matrix. Any feedforward
network can thus be implemented via message passing, which propagates information through a specially designed
directed graph – its computational graph.

In our analysis, we compare “large” neural networks to “small” neural networks that compress them. To define a
distance between the computational graphs of networks of different sizes, we embed graphs of all sizes into the space
of kernels, where there is linear structure and a natural norm. Rather than explicitly defining a computational graph
and then inducing a corresponding kernel, we directly specify the class of kernels that encode valid neural network
computations. These kernels, which we call computational kernels, are constructed so that, for each dense feedforward
neural network, message passing with ReLU nonlinearities on the corresponding kernel exactly reproduces the forward
propagation of the network. For completeness, we provide the equivalent graph-based definition in Appendix E. All
results in the current section are proved in Appendix A.

Fixed-Width Networks. To simplify the presentation and subsequent analysis, we restrict the analysis to networks
with fixed hidden width, i.e., 𝑑ℓ = 𝑑 for all ℓ = 1, . . . , 𝐿 − 1. In this case, the network size is 𝑛 = (𝐿 + 2)𝑑, the number
of parameters is (𝐿 − 1)𝑑 2 + (𝑑0 + 𝑑 𝐿 + 𝐿 − 1)𝑑 + 𝑑 𝐿 , and the forward propagation rule becomes, for all ℓ ∈ [𝐿] and
𝑖 ∈ [𝑑ℓ ],
                                                                  𝑑ℓ −1
                                                          1        ∑︁
                                   h𝑖(ℓ ) = ReLU­                       𝑊𝑖(ℓ𝑗 ) h (ℓ −1)
                                                                                         + 𝑏 𝑖(ℓ ) ® .
                                                ©                                                 ª
                                                  𝑑ℓ −1 (𝐿 + 2) 𝑗=1               𝑗
                                                «                                                  ¬
Note that we can absorb the (𝐿 + 2) factor by choosing 𝐵 = (𝐿 + 2)𝐶 for some 𝐶 > 0. For simplicity, we assume that 𝑑
is divisible by both 𝑑0 and 𝑑 𝐿 ; this assumption is not essential and can be removed at the cost of additional notation.
The space of all such networks, with any value of 𝑑, is denoted by N N (𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) and similarly, the space of all such
dense networks with weights and biases bounded in [−𝐵, 𝐵] by N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ).

The Computational Kernel of a Neural Network. We call a kernel 𝐾 : [0, 1] 2 → [−1, 1] a depth-𝐿 computational
kernel with respect to the parameters 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ∈ N and 𝐵 ∈ R with 𝐵 ≥ 𝐿 + 2 if 𝐾 satisfies the following four conditions
(for geometric interpretation, consult Figure 1). Each condition encodes a specific structural property of fixed-width
feedforward networks, including layerwise connectivity, normalization of weights, and the representation of bias terms.

• Condition 1. There exists 𝑛 ∈ N divisible by 𝑀 (𝐿 + 2), where 𝑀 is the least common multiple of 𝑑0 and 𝑑 𝐿 , such
  that 𝐾 is a step kernel with respect to the interval equipartition I𝑛 of [0, 1] into 𝑛 intervals.
    Notation: I𝑛 is a refinement of the interval equipartition U𝐿+2 := {𝑈 (0) , . . . , 𝑈 (𝐿) , 𝑈 (bias) } of [0, 1] into 𝐿 + 2
    intervals of length 1/(𝐿 + 2), where each 𝑈 (ℓ ) , ℓ = 0, . . . , 𝐿, is called a layer, and 𝑈 (bias) is called a bias. We call
    U𝐿+2 the layer partition. For each ℓ, define R 𝑑(ℓ ) := {𝐼 ∈ I𝑛 | 𝐼 ⊆ 𝑈 (ℓ ) }. Here, R 𝑑(ℓ ) consists of 𝑑 := 𝑛/(𝐿 + 2)
    intervals. The partition R 𝑑(0) is the refinement of the coarser interval equipartition C𝑑in0 of the interval 𝑈 (0) into 𝑑0



                                                                5
                          bias ℓ0   ℓ1   ℓ2   ℓ3

                     ℓ3
                     ℓ2
                     ℓ1                            𝑦 (source)
                     ℓ0
                   bias

                                𝑥 (target)                                                     𝑥 (input)
               𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ CK (𝐿 = 3, 𝑑0 = 4, 𝑑 𝐿 = 2)                           𝑓 (𝑥) ∈ CS(𝐿 = 3, 𝑑0 = 4, 𝑑 𝐿 = 2)

Figure 1: A computational kernel-signal with 𝑑 = 8. The kernel 𝐾 is nonzero only on blocks linking consecutive layers and
bias-to-layer blocks; visible stripes in the first/last layer blocks reflect constancy over input/output coarse intervals. The signal 𝑓
shares the same coarse-interval structure.


  intervals of length 1/(𝐿 + 2)𝑑0 called the input partition. The partition R 𝑑(𝐿) is a refinement of the coarser interval
  equipartition C𝑑out
                   𝐿
                      of the interval 𝑈 ( 𝐿) into 𝑑 𝐿 intervals of length 1/(𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 called the output partition.

• Condition 2. The kernel satisfies 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦 ′ ) whenever 𝑦 and 𝑦 ′ belong to the same interval of C𝑑in0 . Moreover,
  𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝐾 (𝑥 ′ , 𝑦) whenever 𝑥 and 𝑥 ′ belong to the same interval of C𝑑out
                                                                              𝐿
                                                                                 . In addition, 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦 ′ ) whenever
  𝑦 and 𝑦 ′ belong to 𝑈 (bias) .
• Condition 3. The kernel satisfies 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 0 whenever either 𝑦 ∈ 𝑈 (ℓ ) and 𝑥 ∉ 𝑈 (ℓ+1) for some ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , 𝐿 − 1},
  or 𝑦 ∈ 𝑈 (bias) and 𝑥 ∈ 𝑈 (0) , or 𝑥 ∈ 𝑈 (bias) and 𝑦 ∉ 𝑈 (bias) .
• Condition 4. For any 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝑈 (bias) , 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = (𝐿 + 2)/𝐵.

We call 𝑑0 the input dimension, 𝑑 𝐿 the output dimension, and refer to 𝑑 = 𝑛/(𝐿 + 2) as the hidden dimension for
ℓ = 1, . . . , 𝐿 − 1. We call 𝑛 the size of the computational kernel. By CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ), we denote the collection of all
depth-𝐿 computational kernels as defined above.

Remark 3. Note that for any computational kernel there is a dense neural network that induces it. Similarly, every
computational input signal is induced by some input to the network.

Computational Signals. While the kernel encodes weights, the signal encodes activations – inputs and propagated
                                                                                                                  𝐿−1 R (ℓ ) ∪
values. Given parameters 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 , a computational signal is any step signal with respect to the partition ∪ℓ=1      𝑑
C𝑑in0 ∪ C𝑑out ∪ {𝑈 (bias) }. Denote the space of computational signals by CS(𝐿, 𝑑 , 𝑑 ). We define a computational input
           𝐿
                                                                                    0  𝐿
signal as any computational signal satisfying 𝑓 (𝑥) = 1 for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝑈 (bias) and 𝑓 (𝑥) = 0 for all 𝑥 ∉ 𝑈 (0) ∪ 𝑈 (bias) . The
values of 𝑓 on the intervals of C𝑑in0 are interpreted as the input vector to the network, while the constant value on 𝑈 (bias)
represents a bias signal that is present at every layer. Condition 4 in the definition of a computational kernel, i.e.,
𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = (𝐿 + 2)/𝐵 for all 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝑈 (bias) , ensures that this bias signal is unchanged during propagation, i.e., under
successive applications of the computational kernel on the signal.

We call a pair in CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) × CS(𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) a computational kernel-signal.

Computational Kernel Induced by Network Parameters. Given a dense neural network, one can induce a
computational kernel on which the 𝐵-IR-MPNN implements the forward propagation of the neural network. Let (W, b)
be the dense parameters of the neural network Θ (W,b) ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ), with hidden dimension 𝑑 divisible by
𝑑0 and 𝑑 𝐿 . Denote 𝑛 = 𝑑 (𝐿 + 2). We define the computational kernel 𝐾 = 𝐾 (W,b) ∈ CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) induced by
Θ (W,b) as follows. For every (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ [0, 1] 2 :

• 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑊𝑖,(1)𝑗 /𝐵 if 𝑦 is in the 𝑗th interval of C𝑑in0 and 𝑥 is in the 𝑖th interval of R 𝑑(1) .


                                                                   6
• 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑊𝑖,( 𝐿)                                    (𝐿−1)
                  𝑗 /𝐵 if 𝑦 is in the 𝑗th interval of R 𝑑     and 𝑥 is in the 𝑖th interval of C𝑑out
                                                                                                 𝐿
                                                                                                    .

• For ℓ = 2, . . . , 𝐿 − 1, 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑊𝑖,(ℓ𝑗) /𝐵 if 𝑦 is in the 𝑗th interval of R 𝑑(ℓ −1) and 𝑥 is in the 𝑖th interval of R 𝑑(ℓ ) .

• For ℓ = 2, . . . , 𝐿 −1, 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑏 𝑖(ℓ ) /𝐵 if 𝑦 is in 𝑈 (bias) and 𝑥 is in the 𝑖th interval of R 𝑑(ℓ ) . Moreover, 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑏 𝑖(𝐿) /𝐵
  if 𝑦 is in 𝑈 (bias) and 𝑥 is in the 𝑖th interval of C𝑑out  𝐿
                                                               .

• For any 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝑈 (bias) , 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = (𝐿 + 2)/𝐵.

Given an input vector x = (𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑑0 ) ∈ R𝑑0 to the neural network, we define the induced input signal as the
computational input signal 𝑓x satisfying 𝑓x (𝑣) = 𝑥 𝑗 whenever 𝑣 is in the 𝑗th interval of C𝑑in0 . In the above construction,
when writing “the 𝑗th interval of the partition...” we implicitly assume that the intervals are always sorted in increasing
order.

Networks as MPNNs. We can now state the key equivalence: Lemma 4 shows that the output of a 𝐵-strongly dense
neural network can be represented as the output of an 𝐿-layer 𝐵-IR-MPNN applied to its induced computational kernel.
This allows us to import tools from graph theory in Section 4.

Lemma 4. Let (W, b) be the dense parameters of Θ (W,b) ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ). Then, for any input x ∈ R𝑑0 and
output channel 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 𝐿 ], we have                                    
                                    Θ (W,b) (x)𝑖 = Φ 𝐵,𝐿 𝐾 (W,b) , 𝑓x 𝑣 ,
whenever 𝑣 is in the 𝑖th interval of C𝑑out
                                        𝐿
                                           .


4     Model Compression
Modern deep learning models often contain millions or even billions of parameters, making them computationally
expensive and memory-intensive. Model compression – a family of techniques including pruning [LeCun et al., 1990],
quantization [Jacob et al., 2018], and distillation [Hinton et al., 2015] – has shown experimentally that smaller networks
can frequently match the performance of much larger ones. Our approach to compression differs fundamentally from
these existing methods in objective. While these methods propose empirical heuristics to compress specific trained
models, our goal is to provide a deterministic guarantee that any network in a given class, regardless of whether it
was trained or how it was initialized, can be approximated by a bounded-size network. This guarantee will be used in
Section 5 to establish a formal barrier to the universal approximation power of dense neural networks. The full proofs of
results from this section are presented in Appendix B.

Computational Cut Distance. In order to define compression, we first need to define a measure of similarity between
the compressed and original object. In our analysis, two computational kernels are considered equivalent if one
can be obtained from the other using a “permutation of the vertices” that preserves the layer structure. Next, we
formalize this idea more accurately. Let S𝐿 denote the set of measure-preserving bijections 𝜙 : [0, 1] → [0, 1] such
that each 𝑈 (ℓ ) , ℓ = 1, . . . , 𝐿 − 1, is invariant under 𝜙, and 𝜙(𝑥) = 𝑥 for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝑈 (0) ∪ 𝑈 (𝐿) ∪ 𝑈 (bias) .2 Define
𝐽 𝜙 (𝑥, 𝑦) := 𝐽 (𝜙(𝑥), 𝜙(𝑦)). The computational cut distance between the computational kernel-signals (𝐾, 𝑓 ), (𝐽, 𝑔) is
defined to be
                                    comp
                                   𝛿□ ((𝐾, 𝑓 ), (𝐽, 𝑔)) := inf (∥𝐾 − 𝐽 𝜙 ∥ □ + ∥ 𝑓 − 𝑔 ◦ 𝜙∥ □ ).
                                                                 𝜙∈ S𝐿
                     comp
We define similarly 𝛿□ (𝐾, 𝐽) := inf 𝜙∈ S𝐿 ∥𝐾 − 𝐽 𝜙 ∥ □ . The computational cut distance is a pseudometric. MPNNs
were shown in Levie [2023] to be Lipschitz continuous with respect to the cut norm, with a further extension in
Rauchwerger and Levie [2025]. In this work, we adapt the techniques of Levie [2023], Rauchwerger and Levie [2025]
to our setting in order to obtain an explicit bound on the Lipschitz constant of 𝐵-strongly dense ReLU networks w.r.t.
the computational cut distance.
  2 More accurately, 𝜙 is a measure preserving bijection between two co-null sets of [0, 1], as our analysis is always up to sets of measure zero.

Measure preserving means that 𝜇 ( 𝐴) = 𝜇 ( 𝜙 ( 𝐴) ) for measurable subsets 𝐴 of the domain of 𝜙.




                                                                         7
Theorem 5 (Computational Cut Distance Lipschitz Continuity). Let 𝐵 > 0 and let Φ 𝐵,𝐿 be the 𝐿-layer 𝐵-IR-MPNN.
Let (𝐾, 𝑓 ), (𝐽, 𝑔) ∈ CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) × CS(𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) be two computational kernel-signals. Let

                               Out𝐾 , 𝑓 := 1𝑈 (𝐿) Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓 ),       Out 𝐽 ,𝑔 := 1𝑈 ( 𝐿) Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐽, 𝑔).

Then
                                                                            comp                  
                                   ∥Out𝐾 , 𝑓 − Out 𝐽 ,𝑔 ∥ □ ≤ 2 𝐿 𝐵 𝐿 𝛿□           (𝐾, 𝑓 ), (𝐽, 𝑔) .

Note that ∥Out𝐾 , 𝑓 − Out 𝐽 ,𝑔 ∥ □ is a signal cut norm, as (Out𝐾 , 𝑓 − Out 𝐽 ,𝑔 ) : [0, 1] → R.

Computational Kernel Weak Regularity Lemma. Theorem 6 establishes that any computational kernel, regardless
of its original size or complexity, can be approximated by a smaller, structured kernel. Specifically, we utilize a variant
of the weak regularity lemma [Frieze and Kannan, 1999] for kernels [László and Szegedy, 2007] to approximate any
kernel by a step kernel whose complexity – measured by the number of steps in its partition – depends solely on the
desired error 𝜖 in the computational cut distance. Building on techniques from Levie [2023], Rauchwerger and Levie
[2025], we refine this step kernel to preserve the specific neural bipartite layer structure, as well as the fixed input and
output dimensions.

Theorem 6. Let 𝐾 ∈ CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) be an 𝐿-layer computational kernel. For any 𝜖 > 0, there exists an 𝐿-layer
computational kernel 𝐾 ′ ∈ CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) with hidden dimension
                                                          l      2
                                                                      m
                                                 𝑑 = 8𝑀 𝐿 22⌈16/𝜖 ⌉ /𝜖 ,

                                                                          comp
where 𝑀 is the least common multiple of 𝑑0 and 𝑑 𝐿 , such that 𝛿□                (𝐾, 𝐾 ′ ) < 𝜖.

This structural reduction allows us to represent the information of an arbitrarily wide network using a much smaller
hidden dimension. When combined with the stability analysis of the forward pass presented in Theorem 5 – showing that
𝐵-IR-MPNNs are Lipschitz continuous with respect to the computational cut distance – this leads directly to our main
compression result. Corollary 7 provides a uniform bound on the size of the approximating network that is independent
of the original network’s width.

Corollary 7 (Network Architecture Approximation). Let 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ∈ N with 𝐿 ≥ 2, let 𝐵 ≥ 𝐿 + 2, and 𝜖 > 0. Then,
for any network Θ ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) there is a network Θ′ ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) with hidden dimension
                                                                                                 
                                          1 2⌈ (16( (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 ) 2 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 )/𝜖 2 ⌉
                            𝑑 = 8𝑀 𝐿         ·2                                  (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 ,
                                          𝜖

such that ∥Θ − Θ′ ∥ ∞ < 𝜖.

Why Not Monte Carlo Compression? A natural alternative to our approach would be to approximate dense networks
by randomly subsampling hidden layer neurons. This approach is often called randomized numerical linear algebra.
However, Monte Carlo sampling does not yield uniform guarantees: the approximation is only successful in high
probability, and the event of success depends on the input to the network. Hence, different inputs would require different
events of subsampled networks, and the intersection of all events in general can be the empty set, preventing simultaneous
control of the approximation error on all inputs. In contrast, the weak regularity lemma provides deterministic and
input-independent compression guarantees.


5      Implications for Approximation
The compression phenomenon established in Section 4 reveals that any dense ReLU network – no matter how large –
can be approximated by a bounded-size network in the computational cut distance. This finding hints at a fundamental
limitation: if expressive power saturates at a finite level of architectural complexity, then sufficiently large networks
cannot continue to gain representational capacity merely by adding width. In this section, we make this intuition precise
by identifying explicit conditions under which dense deep ReLU networks fail to be universal approximators.


                                                                   8
VC-Dimension Based Lower Bounds on Expressivity. The first step is to relate functional approximation capacity to
combinatorial complexity. Recall that for a hypothesis class H of Boolean functions on [0, 1] 𝑑 , the VC-dimension is
the largest number of points that H can shatter. When H consists of thresholded outputs of a ReLU network of fixed
architecture but variable weights, Theorem 8.7 in Anthony and Bartlett [2009] provides the bound VCdim(H ) ≤ 𝑐 · 𝑊 2 ,
where 𝑊 is the total number of weights and 𝑐 > 0 is a universal constant independent of the architecture. This implies
that representational capacity grows at most quadratically in the number of parameters. Theorem 7 of Harvey et al.
[2017] presents an explicit bound that improves upon the classical VC-dimension bound, showing that the universal
constant 𝑐 is in fact small.

The next theorem provides a quantitative lower bound on the number of computational units necessary for universal
approximation, building on [Yarotsky, 2017, Theorem 4(a)]. Our contribution lies in adapting this bound to our setting,
and expressing it in terms of a single implicit constant. Recall that Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) is the space of 1-Lipschitz continuous
functions [0, 1] 𝑑0 → R𝑑𝐿 bounded by 1.

Theorem 8. For any 𝜖 ∈ (0, 1/3), a ReLU network architecture capable of approximating every function 𝑓 ∈ Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 )
with error bounded by 𝜖 must have at least 𝑐 −1/2 (6𝜖) −𝑑0 /2 parameters, where 𝑐 is the absolute constant defined above.

Approximation Limits of Dense Neural Networks. We now connect the above expressivity lower bound with the
compression result. Theorem 8 gives a lower bound on the number of parameters required for an 𝜖 approximation, while
Corollary 7 shows that neural networks that achieve 𝜖 approximation effectively have a uniformly bounded number of
parameters. As it turns out, in certain settings, the lower bound in Theorem 8 is higher than the upper bound entailed by
Corollary 7. This shows that dense neural networks are not universal approximators of Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ).

Theorem 9 (Expressivity Bound of Strongly Dense Neural Networks). Let 𝐿, 𝑑 𝐿 ∈ N with 𝐿 ≥ 2, let 𝐵 ≥ 𝐿 + 2, and let
𝑐 be the constant from Theorem 8. Let 𝑑0 satisfy

                     𝑑0 ≥ 17 log2 𝑐1/2 𝐿 3 (𝐿 + 2) 2 𝑑 4𝐿 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 + 17 · 214 (𝐿 + 2) 2 𝑑 2𝐿 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 + 306.
                                                                 

Then N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) is not a universal approximator of Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ).

We interpret Theorem 9 as follows. Since general neural networks of a fixed depth are universal approximators of
C(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ), they are also universal approximators of Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ). One might expect that neural networks with linear
layers bounded by some universal constant 𝐶 > 1 in their induced infinity norm, i.e. ∥𝑊 (ℓ ) ∥ ∞ < 𝐶, are also universal
approximators of Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ).3 In our definition of strongly dense neural networks, if one chooses 𝐵 = (𝐿 + 2)𝐶 then
the infinity norms of the linear layers are bounded by 𝐶. Hence, one might naively anticipate that N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 )
is a universal approximator of Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ). However, Theorem 9 shows that this is false, given that the input dimension
is large enough (but still independent of 𝑛).

Connection to Double Descent and Modern Deep Learning. Our results in Theorem 9 offer, partially, a theoretical
lens through which to view the double descent phenomenon. Classical bias-variance logic suggests that as the parameter
count surpasses the sample size, the model’s variance should diverge,
                                                                              100
causing the model to overfit the data and impair the generalization capacity.




                                                                                                Train accuracy (%)
However, we show that for strongly dense networks, the realizable capacity     80
actually plateaus, which supports the empirical observation that there is
no unbounded growth of variance. We note that in practical deep learning,      60
the density of the neural network is often implicitly enforced through
techniques such as weight decay or layer normalization.                        40                          Standard
                                                                                                                                                 Dense
Experiments. We empirically validate our findings on MNIST using                                                     20
                                                                                                                          10 0   10 1    10 2       10 3
one-hidden-layer ReLU networks trained with Adam; full details are in                                                             Hidden width
Appendix D. Standard networks closely approximate the target function,
    3 In fact, as far as we know, the following is an open question: There exists a constant 𝐶 > 1, such that the space of neural networks with linear

layers 𝑊 (ℓ) having induced infinity norm ∥𝑊 (ℓ) ∥ ∞ < 𝐶 is a universal approximator of Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑𝐿 ). We note that networks with sort activations
are known to satisfy this property [Anil et al., 2018, Tanielian et al., 2020].



                                                                          9
with training accuracy stabilizing around 98–99%. Dense networks—where weights are clamped to [−10/𝑑𝑖−1 , 10/𝑑𝑖−1 ]
after each update—fail to do so, plateauing at 90–91% across all widths, supporting that density constraints create a
hard barrier to approximation.


6    Conclusion
We presented a framework linking graph-regularity-based compression of dense ReLU networks with VC-dimension
lower bounds on expressivity. The combination yields explicit conditions under which depth- and weight-bounded
dense networks cease to be universal, revealing a saturation effect: beyond a certain scale, width no longer increases
representational capacity. These findings suggest that expressivity is often governed more by architectural structure
than by size alone. While our present results apply to fully connected feedforward architectures, extending our
compression-based analysis to structured families – such as convolutional or attention-based networks – offers a
promising direction for developing a unified theory for expressivity saturation in deep learning.


Acknowledgement
RL is supported by a grant from the United States-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF), Jerusalem, Israel, and
the United States National Science Foundation (NSF), (NSF-BSF, grant No. 2024660), and by the Israel Science
Foundation (ISF grant No. 1937/23). SJ acknowledges support from the Humboldt Foundation.


References
Cem Anil, James Lucas, and Roger Baker Grosse. Sorting out lipschitz function approximation. In Int. Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.

Martin Anthony and Peter L. Bartlett. Neural Network Learning: Theoretical Foundations. Cambridge University Press,
 USA, 1st edition, 2009. ISBN 052111862X.

Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, Behnam Neyshabur, and Yi Zhang. Stronger generalization bounds for deep nets via a
  compression approach, 2018.

Jan Böker, Ron Levie, Ningyuan Huang, Soledad Villar, and Christopher Morris. Fine-grained expressivity of graph
  neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2023.

Yu Cheng, Duo Wang, Pan Zhou, and Tao Zhang. Model compression and acceleration for deep neural networks: The
  principles, progress, and challenges. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 35(1):126–136, 2018.

G. Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of Control, Signals and Systems, 2
  (4):303–314, 1989.

Utku Evci, Trevor Gale, Jacob Menick, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Erich Elsen. Rigging the lottery: Making all tickets
  winners. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh, editors, Int. Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 119 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 2943–2952. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.

Ben Finkelshtein, undefinedsmail undefinedlkan Ceylan, Michael Bronstein, and Ron Levie. Learning on large graphs
  using intersecting communities. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2024.

Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural networks. In Int.
  Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

A. Frieze and R. Kannan. Quick approximation to matrices and applications. Combinatorica, 19(2):175–220, Feb. 1999.

J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl. Neural message passing for quantum chemistry. Int.
   Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 1263–1272, 2017a.


                                                          10
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neural message passing for
  quantum chemistry. In Int. Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 1263–1272, 2017b.

M. Gori, G. Monfardini, and F. Scarselli. A new model for learning in graph domains. In IJCNN, 2005.

Song Han, Jeff Pool, John Tran, and William Dally. Learning both weights and connections for efficient neural network.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 28, 2015.

Nick Harvey, Christopher Liaw, and Abbas Mehrabian. Nearly-tight VC-dimension bounds for piecewise linear neural
  networks. In Satyen Kale and Ohad Shamir, editors, Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Learning Theory,
  volume 65 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1064–1068. PMLR, 07–10 Jul 2017.

Zheng He, Zeke Xie, Quanzhi Zhu, and Zengchang Qin. Sparse double descent: Where network pruning aggravates
  overfitting. In Int. Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 06 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2206.08684.

Daniel Herbst and Stefanie Jegelka. Higher-Order Graphon Neural Networks: Approximation and Cut Distance. Int.
  Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025. Spotlight Paper. arXiv:2503.14338.

Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. In NIPS Deep Learning
  and Representation Learning Workshop, 2015.

Torsten Hoefler, Dan Alistarh, Tal Ben-Nun, Nikoli Dryden, and Alexandra Peste. Sparsity in deep learning: pruning
  and growth for efficient inference and training in neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1),
  January 2021. ISSN 1532-4435.

Kurt Hornik. Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward networks. Neural Networks, 4(2):251–257, 1991.
  ISSN 0893-6080.

Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, Andrew Howard, Hartwig Adam, and
  Dmitry Kalenichenko. Quantization and training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference.
  IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 2704–2713, 2018.

Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and generalization in neural
  networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.

Tian Jin, Michael Carbin, Daniel M. Roy, Jonathan Frankle, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Pruning’s effect on
  generalization through the lens of training and regularization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NIPS), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), Red Hook, NY, USA, 2022. Curran Associates
  Inc. ISBN 9781713871088.

Jonathan Kouchly, Ben Finkelshtein, Michael Bronstein, and Ron Levie. Efficient learning on large graphs using a
  densifying regularity lemma. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.

Yann LeCun, John S Denker, and Sara A Solla. Optimal Brain Damage. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NIPS), volume 2, pages 598–605. Morgan Kaufmann, 1990.

Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep Learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444, 2015. doi:
  10.1038/nature14539.

Namhoon Lee, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and Philip H. S. Torr. Snip: Single-shot Network Pruning based on Connection
  Sensitivity. In Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR). OpenReview.net, 2019.

Moshe Leshno, Vladimir Ya. Lin, Allan Pinkus, and Shimon Schocken. Multilayer feedforward networks with a
 nonpolynomial activation function can approximate any function. Neural Networks, 6(6):861–867, 1993. ISSN
 0893-6080. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0893-6080(05)80131-5.

Ron Levie. A Graphon-Signal Analysis of Graph Neural Networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems


                                                         11
  (NIPS), 2023.

L. Lovász. Large Networks and Graph Limits, volume 60 of Colloquium Publications. American Mathematical Society,
   2012.

Lovász László and Balázs Szegedy. Szemerédi’s Lemma for the Analyst. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 17:
  252–270, 04 2007. doi: 10.1007/s00039-007-0599-6.

Cláudio M. S. Medeiros and Guilherme A. Barreto. An efficient method for pruning the multilayer perceptron based
  on the correlation of errors. In Joaquim Marques de Sá, Luı́s A. Alexandre, W lodzis law Duch, and Danilo
  Mandic, editors, Artificial Neural Networks – ICANN 2007, pages 219–228, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin
  Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-74690-4.

Gaurav Menghani. Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better.
 ACM Computing Surveys, 55(12), March 2023. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3578938.

C. Merkwirth and T. Lengauer. Automatic generation of complementary descriptors with molecular graph networks.
  Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 45(5):1159–1168, 2005.

H. N. Mhaskar. Neural Networks for Optimal Approximation of Smooth and Analytic Functions. Neural Computation,
  8(1):164–177, 1996.

Decebal Constantin Mocanu, Elena Mocanu, Peter Stone, Phuong H Nguyen, Madeleine Gibescu, and Antonio Liotta.
  Scalable Training of Artificial Neural Networks with Adaptive Sparse Connectivity Inspired by Network Science.
  Nature Communications, 9(1):2383, 2018. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-04316-3.

Elena-Alexandra Peste. Efficiency and Generalization of Sparse Neural Networks. Phd thesis, Institute of Science and
  Technology Austria, 2023.

Allan Pinkus. Approximation theory of the MLP model in neural networks. Acta Numerica, 8:143–195, 1999. doi:
  10.1017/S0962492900002919.

Levi Rauchwerger and Ron Levie. A Note on Graphon-Signal Analysis of Graph Neural Networks. arXiv preprint,
  2025.

Levi Rauchwerger, Stefanie Jegelka, and Ron Levie. Generalization, Expressivity, and Universality of Graph Neural
  Networks on Attributed Graphs. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.

Emanuele Rossi, Bertrand Charpentier, Francesco Di Giovanni, Fabrizio Frasca, Stephan Günnemann, and Michael
 Bronstein. Edge directionality improves learning on heterophilic graphs. In Proceedings of Machine Learning
 Research, 05 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.10498.

Ugo Tanielian, Maxime Sangnier, and Gérard Biau. Approximating lipschitz continuous functions with groupsort neural
  networks. International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, abs/2006.05254, 2020.

Neil C. Thompson, Kristjan H. Greenewald, Keeheon Lee, and Gabriel F. Manso. The Computational Limits of Deep
  Learning. Ninth Workshop on Computing within Limits, abs/2007.05558, 2020.

Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How Powerful are Graph Neural Networks? Int. Conf. on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

Dmitry Yarotsky. Error bounds for approximations with deep ReLU networks. Neural Networks, 94:103–114, 2017.
 ISSN 0893-6080.




                                                        12
A     Proof of Deep Neural Networks as MPNNs
Lemma 4 shows that the output of a 𝐵-strongly dense neural network can be represented as the output of an 𝐿-layer
𝐵-IR-MPNN applied to its induced computational kernel. To prove Lemma 4, we first show Lemma 10, which states
that the 𝐵-IR-MPNN applied to a computational kernel-signal is stationary on 𝑈 (bias) .

Lemma 10. Let (𝐾 (W,b) , 𝑓 ) ∈ CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) × CS(𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) be a computational kernel-signal. Then, the hidden
representations of the 𝐵-IR-MPNN satisfy:

                                               𝑓 (ℓ ) |𝑈 (bias) ≡ 1,   for ℓ = 0, . . . , 𝐿.

That is, the hidden representations are constant and share the same value on 𝑈 (bias) .

Proof. We prove the claim using induction. Recall that by the definition of computational kernel for any 𝑣 ∈ 𝑈 (bias) :
                                              (
                                                (𝐿 + 2)/𝐵 if 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 (bias) ,
                                   𝐾 (𝑣, 𝑢) =
                                                0             otherwise.


Induction Base.      By the definitions of computational signals and of the 𝐵-IR-MPNN, we have

                                                              𝑓 (0) |𝑈 (bias) ≡ 1.


Induction Assumption.        We assume that 𝑓 (ℓ −1) |𝑈 (bias) ≡ 1 for 0 < ℓ ≤ 𝐿.

Induction Step.     By the definition of the 𝐵-IR-MPNN and the induction assumption, for any 𝑣 ∈ 𝑈 (bias) :
                                                        ∫                                    
                                    (ℓ )                                       (ℓ −1)
                                   𝑓 (𝑣) := 𝐵 · ReLU              𝐾 (𝑣, 𝑢) 𝑓          (𝑢)𝑑𝑢
                                                           [0,1]
                                                       ∫                                       
                                                                                   (ℓ −1)
                                           = 𝐵 · ReLU             (𝐿 + 2)/𝐵 𝑓             (𝑢)𝑑𝑢
                                                         𝑈 (bias)
                                                               ∫                           
                                                                             (ℓ −1)
                                           = (𝐿 + 2) · ReLU                𝑓        (𝑢)𝑑𝑢
                                                                  𝑈 (bias)
                                                               ∫             
                                           = (𝐿 + 2) · ReLU                𝑑𝑢
                                                                  𝑈 (bias)
                                                                  
                                           = (𝐿 + 2) · 𝜇 𝑈 (bias) = 1.

This concludes the proof.

Now, we use Lemma 10 to show Lemma 4.

Lemma 4. Let (W, b) be the dense parameters of Θ (W,b) ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ). Then, for any input x ∈ R𝑑0 and
output channel 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 𝐿 ], we have                                    
                                    Θ (W,b) (x)𝑖 = Φ 𝐵,𝐿 𝐾 (W,b) , 𝑓x 𝑣 ,
whenever 𝑣 is in the 𝑖th interval of C𝑑out
                                        𝐿
                                           .


Proof. We now show that for ℓ = 0, . . . , 𝐿 the activation of the ℓth hidden layer h𝑖(ℓ ) in channel 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑ℓ ] of the network
Θ (W,b) is equal to the hidden 𝐵-IR-MPNN representation 𝑓 (ℓ ) (𝑣) whenever 𝑣 is in the 𝑖th interval of P (ℓ ) , when
                                                        
                                                        
                                                         C𝑑in0 , if ℓ = 0,
                                               P (ℓ ) := R 𝑑(ℓ ) if 0 < ℓ < 𝐿,
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                         C out if ℓ = 𝐿.
                                                        
                                                         𝑑𝐿

                                                                       13
Recall that by the definition of the computational kernel, for any 𝑣 in the 𝑖th interval of P (ℓ ) , ℓ ∈ [𝐿]:

                     
                      𝑏 (ℓ ) /𝐵 if 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 (bias) and 𝑣 is in the 𝑖th interval of P (ℓ ) ,
                      𝑖 (ℓ )
                     
                     
           𝐾 (𝑣, 𝑢) = 𝑊𝑖, 𝑗 /𝐵 if 𝑢 is in the 𝑗th interval of P (ℓ −1) and 𝑣 is in the 𝑖th interval of P (ℓ ) ,
                     
                     0
                     
                                 otherwise.
                     
We prove the statement inductively.

Induction Base.      Let ℓ = 0 and 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑0 ], then, for any 𝑣 in the 𝑖th interval of P (0) and x = (𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑑0 ) ∈ R𝑑0

                                                                 𝑓 (0) (𝑣) = 𝑓x (𝑣) = 𝑥𝑖 = h𝑖(0) .


Induction Assumption.         For layers ℓ = 1, . . . , 𝐿, channels 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑ℓ −1 ] and for any 𝑣 in the 𝑖th interval of P (ℓ −1) ,
assume that
                                                                        𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑣) = h𝑖(ℓ −1) .


Induction Step. Denote the 𝑗th interval of the partition P (ℓ ) by 𝐼 𝑗(ℓ ) . Then, for any 𝑣 in the 𝑖th interval of the partition
P (ℓ ) :
                                  ∫                          
           𝑓 (ℓ ) (𝑣) := 𝐵 · ReLU     𝐾 (𝑣, 𝑢) 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑢)𝑑𝑢
                                             [0,1]

                                                ∑︁               ∫                                             ∫
                                                                              (𝑊𝑖,(ℓ𝑗) /𝐵) 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑢)𝑑𝑢 +                 (𝑏 𝑖(ℓ ) /𝐵) 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑢)𝑑𝑢 ®®
                                 ©                                                                                                                       ª
                      = 𝐵 · ReLU­­
                                                                     (ℓ −1)
                                           (ℓ −1)                 𝐼𝑗                                             𝑈 (bias)
                                      «𝐼 𝑗          ∈ P (ℓ −1)                                                                                          ¬
                                        ∑︁               ∫                                        ∫
                                                                       𝑊𝑖,(ℓ𝑗) 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑢)𝑑𝑢 +                𝑏 𝑖(ℓ ) 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑢)𝑑𝑢 ®® =: (∗)
                             ©                                                                                                         ª
                      = ReLU­­
                                                            (ℓ −1)
                                  (ℓ −1)                   𝐼𝑗                                       𝑈 (bias)
                               «𝐼 𝑗        ∈ P (ℓ −1)                                                                                   ¬

By the induction assumption 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑣) = h𝑖(ℓ −1) on any 𝑣 in the 𝑖th interval of P (ℓ −1) and since by definition
𝑓x |𝑈 (bias) ≡ 1, then, 𝑓 (ℓ −1) |𝑈 (bias) ≡ 1 by Lemma 10 and. Thus

                                     𝑑ℓ −1 ∫                                ∫
                                    © ∑︁                 (ℓ ) (ℓ −1)
                         (∗) = ReLU­                   𝑊𝑖, 𝑗 h 𝑗     𝑑𝑢 +             𝑏 𝑖(ℓ ) 𝑑𝑢 ®
                                                                                                 ª
                                                (ℓ −1)                         (bias)
                                              𝐼                              𝑈
                                    « 𝑗=1 𝑗                                                      ¬
                                     𝑑 ℓ −1                                                     
                                    © ∑︁ (ℓ ) (ℓ −1)
                             = ReLU­        𝑊𝑖, 𝑗 h 𝑗        · 𝜇 𝐼 𝑗(ℓ −1) + 𝑏 𝑖(ℓ ) 𝜇 𝑈 (bias) ® =: (∗∗)
                                                                                                     ª

                                    « 𝑗=1                                                            ¬
                                                      
Recall that 𝜇 𝑈 (bias) = 1/(𝐿 + 2) and 𝜇 𝐼 𝑗(ℓ −1) = 1/(𝑑ℓ −1 (𝐿 + 2)) by the definition of the computational kernel.
                      

Therefore
                                           𝑑ℓ −1                  ∫                         ∫
                                         © ∑︁ (ℓ ) (ℓ −1)
                              (∗∗) = ReLU­       𝑊𝑖, 𝑗 h 𝑗                    𝑑𝑢 + 𝑏 𝑖(ℓ )
                                                                                                           ª
                                                                                                        𝑑𝑢 ®
                                                                       (ℓ −1)                    (bias)
                                                                     𝐼                        𝑈
                                         « 𝑗=1                         𝑗
                                                                                                           ¬
                                           𝑑ℓ −1                  ∫
                                           ∑︁                                             1
                                   = ReLU­       𝑊𝑖,(ℓ𝑗) h (ℓ −1)
                                                                              𝑑𝑢 +            𝑏 𝑖(ℓ ) ®
                                         ©                                                            ª
                                                           𝑗
                                                                     𝐼𝑗
                                                                       (ℓ −1)          𝐿  + 2
                                         « 𝑗=1                                                        ¬
                                                               𝑑ℓ −1
                                                   1           ∑︁                                  
                                   = ReLU ­                              𝑊𝑖(ℓ𝑗 ) h (ℓ −1)
                                                                                          + 𝑏 𝑖(ℓ ) ® = h𝑖(ℓ ) .
                                          ©                                                           ª
                                            𝑑ℓ −1 (𝐿 + 2) 𝑗=1                      𝑗
                                          «                                                           ¬


                                                                                     14
This concludes the proof since

                                     Θ (W,b) (x)𝑖 = h𝑖(𝐿) = 𝑓 (𝐿) (𝑣) = Φ 𝐵,𝐿 𝐾 (W,b) , 𝑓x 𝑣 ,
                                                                                           

whenever 𝑣 is in the 𝑖th interval of C𝑑out
                                        𝐿




B      Proofs of Model Compression
Here we prove our Lipschitz continuity of 𝐵-IR-MPNN (Theorem 5), our weak regularity lemma (Theorem 6), and our
compression result (Corollary 7).

Lipschitz Continuity of MPNNs. MPNNs were shown to be Lipschitz continuous with respect to the cut norm
in Levie [2023], with a further extension in Rauchwerger and Levie [2025]. In this work, we adapt the techniques
developed in Levie [2023] to our setting in order to obtain an explicit bound on the Lipschitz constant.

We first recall some useful lemmas.

Lemma 11 (Levie [2023], Equation (9)). Let 𝑓 : [0, 1] → R be measurable. Then
                                                       1
                                                         ∥ 𝑓 ∥1 ≤ ∥ 𝑓 ∥□ ≤ ∥ 𝑓 ∥1 .
                                                       2

Denote by 𝐿 + [0, 1] the space of measurable functions 𝑓 : [0, 1] → [0, 1].

Lemma 12 (Levie [2023], Lemma F.5/Lovász [2012], Lemma 8.10). Let 𝑄 : [0, 1] 2 → R be measurable. Then
                                                 ∫
                            ∥𝑄∥ □ =      sup          𝑓 (𝑥)𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦)𝑔(𝑦)d𝑥d𝑦 ,
                                                 𝑓 ,𝑔∈ 𝐿 + [0,1]     [0,1] 2

where the supremum is attained for some 𝑓 , 𝑔 ∈ 𝐿 + [0, 1] with values in {0, 1}.

Lemma 13 (Cut Norm Lipschitz Continuity). Let 𝐵 ∈ R and Φ 𝐵,𝐿 be the 𝐿-layer 𝐵-IR-MPNN and (𝐾, 𝑓 ), (𝐽, 𝑔) be
two attributed Kernels. Then,

                               ∥Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓 ) − Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐽, 𝑔) ∥ □ ≤ 2 𝐿 𝐵 𝐿 (∥ 𝑓 − 𝑔∥ □ + ∥𝐾 − 𝐽 ∥ □ ).

Proof. Recall that for a kernel-signal (𝑇, 𝑞)

                                                     Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝑇, 𝑞) (𝑥) := 𝑞 (𝐿) (𝑥),

and for ℓ ∈ [𝐿],
                                                                    ∫                                
                                       𝑞 (ℓ ) (𝑥) := 𝐵 · ReLU                  𝑇 (𝑥, 𝑦)𝑞 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) d𝑦 .
                                                                       [0,1]



We first show that for every ℓ, ∥ 𝑓 (ℓ ) ∥ ∞ , ∥𝑔 (ℓ ) ∥ ∞ ≤ 𝐵ℓ . Indeed, for any 𝑥 ∈ [0, 1]
                                                              ∫
                                           | 𝑓 (ℓ ) (𝑥)| ≤ 𝐵         𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦)d𝑦 .
                                                                   [0,1]

Hence, by Hölder’s inequality
                                             | 𝑓 (ℓ ) (𝑥)| ≤ 𝐵∥ 𝑓 (ℓ −1) ∥ 1 ≤ 𝐵∥ 𝑓 (ℓ −1) ∥ ∞ ,


                                                                         15
so we also have
                                                           ∥ 𝑓 (ℓ ) ∥ ∞ ≤ 𝐵∥ 𝑓 (ℓ −1) ∥ ∞ .
By solving a recurrence sequence, and using ∥ 𝑓 (0) ∥ ∞ ≤ 1, we get ∥ 𝑓 (ℓ ) ∥ ∞ ≤ 𝐵ℓ .

Next, we consider
                                                      ∫                                      ∫                          
                        𝑓 (ℓ ) (𝑥) − 𝑔 (ℓ ) (𝑥) = 𝐵          𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) d𝑦 −           𝐽 (𝑥, 𝑦)𝑔 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) d𝑦 ,

and decompose this difference as
           ∫                               ∫
               𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) d𝑦 −      𝐽 (𝑥, 𝑦)𝑔 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) d𝑦
                            ∫                                             ∫
                                           (ℓ −1)         (ℓ −1)
                                                                            𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) − 𝐽 (𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) d𝑦.
                                                                                              
                         =      𝐽 (𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑓        (𝑦) − 𝑔        (𝑦) d𝑦 +

By the triangle inequality,

                                       ∥Φ 𝐵,ℓ (𝐾, 𝑓 ) − Φ 𝐵,ℓ (𝐽, 𝑔) ∥ □
                                                 ∫
                                           ≤𝐵∥        𝐽 (𝑥, 𝑦) ( 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) − 𝑔 (ℓ −1) (𝑦)) d𝑦∥ □                             (4)
                                                     ∫
                                              + 𝐵∥ (𝐾 − 𝐽) (𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) d𝑦∥ □ .                                          (5)

We bound Equation (4), using Lemma 11, by
             ∫                                                    ∫
                             (ℓ −1)         (ℓ −1)
           ∥    𝐽 (𝑥, 𝑦) ( 𝑓        (𝑦) − 𝑔        (𝑦)) d𝑦∥ □ ≤ ∥   𝐽 (𝑥, 𝑦) ( 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) − 𝑔 (ℓ −1) (𝑦)) d𝑦∥ 1
                                                                ∫ ∫
                                                              ≤        𝐽 (𝑥, 𝑦) ( 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) − 𝑔 (ℓ −1) (𝑦)) d𝑦 𝑑𝑥
                                                                ∫ ∫
                                                              ≤        𝐽 (𝑥, 𝑦) ( 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) − 𝑔 (ℓ −1) (𝑦)) d𝑦d𝑥.

Hence, by Hölder’s inequality,
                  ∫                                                   ∫ ∫
                ∥     𝐽 (𝑥, 𝑦) ( 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) − 𝑔 (ℓ −1) (𝑦)) d𝑦∥ □ ≤   1                 ( 𝑓 (ℓ −1) (𝑦) − 𝑔 (ℓ −1) (𝑦)) d𝑦𝑑𝑥

                                                                            ≤ ∥ 𝑓 (ℓ −1) − 𝑔 (ℓ −1) ∥ 1
                                                                            ≤ 2∥ 𝑓 (ℓ −1) − 𝑔 (ℓ −1) ∥ □

where the last inequality is due to Lemma 11.

We bound Equation (5) as follows. Let 𝑞 = 𝑓 (ℓ −1) /𝐵ℓ −1 . By the application of ReLU, and by the bound ∥ 𝑓 (ℓ −1) ∥ ∞ ≤
𝐵ℓ −1 , the function 𝑓 ℓ −1 maps [0, 1] to [0, 𝐵ℓ −1 ], so 𝑞 : [0, 1] → [0, 1]. Let 𝑄 := 𝐾 − 𝐽 : [0, 1] 2 → [−2, 2]. Our goal
               ∫
is to bound ∥ 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦)𝑞(𝑦)𝑑𝑦∥ □ . Let 𝑆 ⊂ [0, 1] be the set for which the cut norm is realized. The existence of such an
𝑆 is guaranteed by Lemma 12. Hence,
                                    ∫                           ∫ ∫
                                  ∥    𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦)𝑞(𝑦)𝑑𝑦∥ □ =             1𝑆 (𝑥)𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦)𝑞(𝑦)𝑑𝑦𝑑𝑥.

Using Lemma 12, we get                          ∫ ∫
                                            |          1𝑆 (𝑥)𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦)𝑞(𝑦)𝑑𝑦𝑑𝑥| ≤ ∥𝑄∥ □ .

Combining the bounds, we obtain

                                  ∥ 𝑓 (ℓ ) − 𝑔 (ℓ ) ∥ □ ≤ 2𝐵∥ 𝑓 (ℓ −1) − 𝑔 (ℓ −1) ∥ □ + 𝐵ℓ ∥𝐾 − 𝐽 ∥ □ .


                                                                         16
Hence,

                                  ∥ 𝑓 (ℓ ) − 𝑔 (ℓ ) ∥ □ ≤ 2𝐵∥ 𝑓 (ℓ −1) − 𝑔 (ℓ −1) ∥ □ + 𝐵ℓ ∥𝐾 − 𝐽 ∥ □ .

Now, denote by 𝑐 (ℓ ) bounds on ∥ 𝑓 (ℓ ) − 𝑔 (ℓ ) ∥ □ , for ℓ = 1, . . . , 𝐿, which satisfy

                                                      𝑐 (ℓ ) = 2𝐵𝑐 (ℓ −1) + 𝐵ℓ 𝑟,

where 𝑟 = ∥𝐾 − 𝐽 ∥ □ . Solving this recurrence sequence, we get
                                                                 ℓ −1
                                                                 ∑︁
                                        𝑐 (ℓ ) = 2ℓ 𝐵ℓ 𝑐 (0) +          2 𝑘 𝐵 𝑘 𝑟 ≤ 2ℓ 𝐵ℓ (𝑐 (0) + 𝑟).
                                                                 𝑘=0

Hence,
                                    ∥ 𝑓 (ℓ ) − 𝑔 (ℓ ) ∥ □ ≤ 2ℓ 𝐵ℓ (∥ 𝑓 (0) − 𝑔 (0) ∥ □ + ∥𝐾 − 𝐽 ∥ □ ).



The following result is a consequence of Lemma 13.

Theorem 5 (Computational Cut Distance Lipschitz Continuity). Let 𝐵 > 0 and let Φ 𝐵,𝐿 be the 𝐿-layer 𝐵-IR-MPNN.
Let (𝐾, 𝑓 ), (𝐽, 𝑔) ∈ CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) × CS(𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) be two computational kernel-signals. Let

                                 Out𝐾 , 𝑓 := 1𝑈 (𝐿) Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓 ),           Out 𝐽 ,𝑔 := 1𝑈 ( 𝐿) Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐽, 𝑔).

Then
                                                                                  comp                  
                                     ∥Out𝐾 , 𝑓 − Out 𝐽 ,𝑔 ∥ □ ≤ 2 𝐿 𝐵 𝐿 𝛿□               (𝐾, 𝑓 ), (𝐽, 𝑔) .

Proof. Consider an arbitrary measure preserving bijection 𝜙 ∈ S𝐿 that preserves the layer structure. Applying Lemma
13 to the pair (𝐾, 𝑓 ) and (𝐽 𝜙 , 𝑔 ◦ 𝜙) yields
                                                                                                       
                       ∥Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓 ) − Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐽 𝜙 , 𝑔 ◦ 𝜙) ∥ □ ≤ 2 𝐿 𝐵 𝐿 ∥𝐾 − 𝐽 𝜙 ∥ □ + ∥ 𝑓 − 𝑔 ◦ 𝜙∥ □ .

Since the above inequality holds for every 𝜙 ∈ S𝐿 , taking the 𝜙 that minimizes the right-hand-side gives
                                                                              comp             
                          ∥Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓 ) − Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐽 𝜙 , 𝑔 ◦ 𝜙) ∥ □ ≤ 2 𝐿 𝐵 𝐿 𝛿□ (𝐾, 𝑓 ), (𝐽, 𝑔) .                         (6)

Denote ℎ = Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓 ) − Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐽 𝜙 , 𝑔 ◦ 𝜙). Note that the signal cut norm in the left-hand side of (6) is either realized
on the set 𝑆 of point where ℎ is positive, or the set of points where it is negative. Hence, multiplying ℎ by 1𝑈 ( 𝐿) can
only decrease the cut norm of ℎ, as the positive and negative supports of 1𝑈 ( 𝐿) ℎ are subsets of the positive and negative
supports of ℎ. Therefore,

                     ∥ 1𝑈 (𝐿) Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓 ) − 1𝑈 (𝐿) Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐽 𝜙 , 𝑔 ◦ 𝜙) ∥ □ ≤ 2 𝐿 𝐵 𝐿 𝛿□ (𝐾, 𝑓 ), (𝐽, 𝑔) .
                                                                                        comp             


Lastly, note that by definition, any measure preserving bijection 𝜙 ∈ S𝐿 keeps 𝑈 (𝐿) unchanged, so

                          ∥ 1𝑈 (𝐿) Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓 ) − 1𝑈 ( 𝐿) Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐽 𝜙 , 𝑔 ◦ 𝜙) ∥ □ = ∥Out𝐾 , 𝑓 − Out 𝐽 ,𝑔 ∥ □ ,

which completes the proof.

The Regularity Lemma for computational Kernels. Let us recall some definitions. Let 𝜇 denote the Lebesgue
measure
Ð𝑘        on [0, 1]. A partition of [0, 1] is a sequence P𝑘 = {𝑃1 , . . . , 𝑃 𝑘 } of disjoint measurable sets such that
  𝑗=1 𝑃 𝑗 = [0, 1]. The partition is called an equipartition if 𝜇(𝑃𝑖 ) = 𝜇(𝑃 𝑗 ) for all 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [𝑘]. We write 1𝑆 for the
indicator function of a set 𝑆. We define step functions as follows.




                                                                        17
                                                         2 of step functions [0, 1] 2 ↦→ R over the partition P to be the
Definition 14. Given a partition P𝑛 , define the space S P𝑛
                                                                                                               𝑛
space of functions of the form                         ∑︁
                                         𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑦) =           𝑐 𝑖, 𝑗 1 𝑃𝑖 ×𝑃 𝑗 (𝑥, 𝑦),
                                                              𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]×[𝑛]

for any choice of {𝑐 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ R}𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] × [𝑛] .

Denote the space of kernels 𝐾 : [0, 1] 2 → [−1, 1] by W1 . Notice that any step kernel with respect to P𝑛 is in the
               2 ∩ W . We define the projection of a kernel onto a partition as its blockwise average over the parts of
intersection S P𝑛
                     1
the partition.
                                                                                                                        2
Definition 15. Let P𝑛 = {𝑃1 , . . . , 𝑃𝑛 } be a partition of [0, 1], and 𝐾 ∈ W1 be a kernel. The projection of 𝐾 upon S P 𝑛
is the step kernel 𝐾 P𝑛 that attains the value
                                                             ∫
                                                    1
                                𝐾 P𝑛 (𝑥, 𝑦) =                        𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦)1 𝑃𝑖 ×𝑃 𝑗 (𝑥, 𝑦)d𝑥d𝑦,
                                               𝜇(𝑃𝑖 )𝜇(𝑃 𝑗 ) [0,1] 2

for every (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝑃𝑖 × 𝑃 𝑗 and 1 ≤ 𝑖, 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛.

The projection is also called the stepping operator. The following theorem, provided in Rauchwerger and Levie [2025],
Appendix B, is an adaptation of the “analyst’s version” of the weak regularity lemma for kernels, originally introduced
in László and Szegedy [2007].

Theorem 16 (Rauchwerger and Levie [2025], Theorem B.5). Let 𝜖 > 0. For every kernel 𝐾 ∈ W1 there exists a
                                      2
partition P𝑘 of [0, 1] into 𝑘 = 22⌈1/𝜖 ⌉ sets, and a step kernel 𝐾 𝑘 ∈ S P
                                                                         2 ∩ W , such that
                                                                           𝑘
                                                                              1

                                                                 ∥𝐾 − 𝐾 𝑘 ∥ □ ≤ 𝜖 .


The following lemma is given in Rauchwerger and Levie [2025] as Lemma B.10.
                                                                                 2 ∩ W . Then, the supremum of
Lemma 17. Let P𝑛 = {𝑃1 , . . . , 𝑃𝑛 } be a partition of [0, 1], and Let 𝑉, 𝑅 ∈ S P𝑛
                                                                                      1
                                                             ∫ ∫
                                                                                         
                                                   sup                 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑦) − 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑑𝑥𝑑𝑦
                                               𝑆,𝑇 ⊂ [0,1]   𝑆    𝑇

is attained for 𝑆, 𝑇 of the form                              Ø                          Ø
                                                         𝑆=           𝑃𝑖 ,        𝑇=            𝑃𝑗,
                                                              𝑖∈𝑠                        𝑗 ∈𝑡

where 𝑡, 𝑠 ⊂ [𝑛].

As part of the proof of Theorem 6, we first show that any computational kernel can be approximated by a coarse step
kernel, where the partition underlying the coarse kernel is not an equipartition in general. Hence, the last step of the
proof involves approximating the coarse kernel by one based on an equipartition. For this, we recall an equatizing lemma
from Levie [2023]. Inspecting the proof of Lemma B.1 from Levie [2023], we can reformulate the lemma as follows.

Lemma 18 (Levie [2023], Equitizing partition). Let P𝑘 be a partition of [𝑎, 𝑏] into 𝑘 sets (generally not of the same
measure). Then, for any 𝑛 > 𝑘 there exists an equipartition E 𝑛 of [0, 1] into 𝑛 sets which satisfies the following. For
                    𝑗
each 𝑗 ∈ [𝑘], let E 𝑛 be the set of all parts of E 𝑛 that are subsets of 𝑃 𝑗 ∈ P𝑘 . Denote
                                                                             𝑘
                                                                             Ø
                                                                                     𝑗
                                                                  T𝑛 :=            E𝑛 ,
                                                                             𝑗=1

and R 𝑛 = E 𝑛 \ T𝑛 . Then, there exists an integer ℎ ≤ 𝑘 such that 𝜇(∪R 𝑛 ) = ℎ/𝑛 and 𝜇(∪T𝑛 ) = 1 − ℎ/𝑛. We call T𝑛 the
refinement parts of E 𝑛 and R 𝑛 the remainder parts.

For completeness, we repeat the proof.


                                                                             18
Proof. Let P𝑘 = {𝑃1 , . . . , 𝑃 𝑘 } be a measurable partition of [0, 1] and let 𝑛 > 𝑘. For each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘], subdivide 𝑃𝑖 into
measurable sets 𝑃𝑖,1 , . . . , 𝑃𝑖,𝑚𝑖 as follows. If 𝜇(𝑃𝑖 ) < 1/𝑛, set 𝑚 𝑖 = 1 and 𝑃𝑖,1 = 𝑃𝑖 . Otherwise, choose 𝑚 𝑖 ≥ 2 such
that 𝜇(𝑃𝑖, 𝑗 ) = 𝑛1 for 𝑗 ∈ [𝑚 𝑖 − 1] and 𝜇(𝑃𝑖,𝑚𝑖 ) ≤ 𝑛1 . We refer to 𝑃𝑖,𝑚𝑖 as the remainder of 𝑃𝑖 . Define the sequence of
parts of measure 1/𝑛 to be

                          Q := {𝑃1,1 , . . . , 𝑃1,𝑚1 −1 , 𝑃2,1 , . . . , 𝑃2,𝑚2 −1 , . . . , 𝑃 𝑘,1 , . . . , 𝑃 𝑘,𝑚𝑘 −1 },
                                                                                                  Ð 
where for indices 𝑖 with 𝑚 𝑖 = 1 there is no contribution in Q. Let 𝑙 := |Q|. By construction, 𝜇      Q = 𝑛𝑙 . Let
     Ð𝑘
Π := 𝑖=1 𝑃𝑖,𝑚𝑖 . Then 𝜇(Π) = 1 − 𝑛𝑙 = 𝑛ℎ , for ℎ := 𝑛 − 𝑙. Since each 𝑃𝑖,𝑚𝑖 has measure at most 1/𝑛 and there are at
most 𝑘 such sets, we have ℎ ≤ 𝑘.

Next, partition Π into ℎ measurable sets Π1 , . . . , Πℎ each of measure exactly 1/𝑛. Define

                                                      E 𝑛 := Q ∪ {Π1 , . . . , Πℎ }.

Then E 𝑛 is a partition of [0, 1] into 𝑛 sets, each of measure 1/𝑛. Let

                                                T𝑛 := Q,            R 𝑛 := {Π1 , . . . , Πℎ }.

By construction,
                                        Ø
                                               ℎ                          Ø      ℎ
                                    𝜇  T𝑛 = 1 − ,                      𝜇        R𝑛 = ,               ℎ ≤ 𝑘,
                                                𝑛                                   𝑛
and each element of T𝑛 is contained in some 𝑃𝑖 ∈ P𝑘 .

The following lemma is a basic result from measure theory.

Lemma 19. For any partition P of [𝑎, 𝑏], there is a measure preserving bijection 𝜙 (between co-null sets of [0, 1]) that
maps P into an interval partition J of [𝑎, 𝑏]. Namely, every 𝐽 ∈ J is of the form 𝐽 = 𝜙 −1 (𝑃), up to a null-set, for
some 𝑃 ∈ P.

Proof.
Í       First, let [𝑎, 𝑏] = [0, 1]. Let P = {𝑃1 , 𝑃2 , . . . } be the partition of [0, 1] into measurable, disjoint sets, with
  𝑖 𝜇(𝑃 𝑖 ) = 1. For each 𝑖, let 𝑞 𝑖 = 𝜇(𝑃𝑖 ). Define intervals

                                                                                                 𝑛−1
                                                                                               h ∑︁           𝑛
                                                                                                             ∑︁      i
                           𝐽1 = [0, 𝑞 1 ],      𝐽2 = [𝑞 1 , 𝑞 1 + 𝑞 2 ],      ...,      𝐽𝑛 =           𝑞𝑘,         𝑞𝑘 .
                                                                                                 𝑘=1         𝑘=1

This gives an interval partition J = {𝐽1 , 𝐽2 , . . . } of [0, 1]. For any two measurable sets 𝐴, 𝐵 ⊂ [0, 1] of equal measure,
there exists a measure-preserving bijection 𝑓 : 𝐴 → 𝐵, up to null sets. Applying this to each 𝑃𝑖 and 𝐽𝑖 , we obtain bijections
𝜙𝑖 : 𝐽𝑖 → 𝑃𝑖 which are measure-preserving (up to null sets). Define 𝜙(𝑥) = 𝜙𝑖 (𝑥) for 𝑥 ∈ 𝐽𝑖 . Then 𝜙 : [0, 1] → [0, 1]
is a measure-preserving bijection up to null sets. Moreover, by construction, each 𝐽𝑖 = 𝜙 −1 (𝑃𝑖 ) up to a null set. If
the original interval is [𝑎, 𝑏] ≠ [0, 1], let 𝑇 : [0, 1] → [𝑎, 𝑏] be the affine map 𝑇 (𝑥) = 𝑎 + (𝑏 − 𝑎)𝑥. Then the map
𝜙˜ := 𝑇 ◦𝜙◦𝑇 −1 : [𝑎, 𝑏] → [𝑎, 𝑏] is a measure-preserving bijection (up to null sets) that maps P to an interval partition of
[𝑎, 𝑏], completing the proof. For any measurable set 𝐵 ⊂ [𝑎, 𝑏], let 𝐴 := 𝑇 −1 (𝐵) ⊂ [0, 1]. Then 𝜙˜−1 (𝐵) = 𝑇 (𝜙 −1 ( 𝐴)),
and the measure on [𝑎, 𝑏] satisfies 𝜇 [𝑎,𝑏] ( 𝜙˜−1 (𝐵)) = (𝑏 − 𝑎) 𝜇(𝜙 −1 ( 𝐴)) = (𝑏 − 𝑎) 𝜇( 𝐴) = 𝜇 [𝑎,𝑏] (𝐵), so 𝜙˜ is
measure-preserving. Furthermore, by construction, 𝜙˜ maps P to an interval partition of [𝑎, 𝑏], completing the
proof.

The proof strategy of Theorem 6 uses techniques from Levie [2023], Corollary B.11 and Rauchwerger and Levie [2025],
Theorem 4.9, both extending techniques from László and Szegedy [2007]. We begin by applying the weak regularity
lemma for kernels (Theorem 16) to obtain an initial approximation of the graph-induced kernel. We then project this
kernel onto the partition provided by Lemma 18, yielding a structured kernel approximation that corresponds to a
computational graph.



                                                                       19
Theorem 6. Let 𝐾 ∈ CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) be an 𝐿-layer computational kernel. For any 𝜖 > 0, there exists an 𝐿-layer
computational kernel 𝐾 ′ ∈ CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) with hidden dimension
                                                          l      2
                                                                      m
                                                 𝑑 = 8𝑀 𝐿 22⌈16/𝜖 ⌉ /𝜖 ,

                                                                            comp
where 𝑀 is the least common multiple of 𝑑0 and 𝑑 𝐿 , such that 𝛿□                  (𝐾, 𝐾 ′ ) < 𝜖.

Throughout the proof, we ensure that the structure of a partition underlying a computational kernel is preserved under
the application of the weak regularity lemma.

Proof. Let 𝜖 > 0, and let 𝐾 be a computational kernel based on the partition Q. First, apply Theorem 16 to the
computational kernel 𝐾 with accuracy 𝜖/4. This yields a step kernel 𝐾 𝑘 , and a measurable partition P𝑘 of [0, 1], such
that
                                                 2
                                      𝑘 = 22⌈16/𝜖 ⌉ ,     ∥𝐾 − 𝐾 𝑘 ∥ □ ≤ 𝜖/4.
The partition P𝑘 is a general measurable partition (not necessarily an interval partition, and not respecting the structure
of a computational kernel).

Let L𝑟 be the partition of [0, 1], with 𝑟 = 𝐿 + 𝑑0 + 𝑑 𝐿 which is the union of:

    • all intermediate layers {𝑈 (1) , . . . , 𝑈 ( 𝐿−1) },

    • the bias layer {𝑈 (bias) },

    • the coarse input partition C𝑑in0 ,

    • the coarse output partition C𝑑out
                                     𝐿
                                        .

We call L𝑟 the layer partition. Let P be the coarsest common refinement of P𝑘 and L𝑟 . We have
                                                                           2
                                            |P | ≤ |P𝑘 | |L𝑟 | = 22⌈16/𝜖 ⌉ (𝐿 + 𝑑0 + 𝑑 𝐿 ),

and P is a measurable (not interval) partition.

By Lemma 17, the cut norm ∥𝐾 𝑘 − 𝐾 P ∥ □ is attained on sets of the form
                                                Ø                 Ø
                                          𝑆=        𝑃𝑖 ,     𝑇=        𝑃𝑗,
                                                        𝑃𝑖 ∈𝑠                   𝑃 𝑗 ∈𝑡

for some 𝑠, 𝑡 ⊂ P. Using the definition of the projected kernel,
                                                      ∫ ∫
                                    ∥𝐾 𝑘 − 𝐾 P ∥ □ =        (𝐾 𝑘 − 𝐾 P ) (𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑑𝑥 𝑑𝑦
                                                       𝑆 𝑇
                                                      ∫ ∫
                                                   =        (𝐾 𝑘 − 𝐾) (𝑥, 𝑦) 𝑑𝑥 𝑑𝑦
                                                                 𝑆   𝑇
                                                             = ∥𝐾 𝑘 − 𝐾 ∥ □ .

Therefore,
                                       ∥𝐾 − 𝐾 P ∥ □ ≤ ∥𝐾 − 𝐾 𝑘 ∥ □ + ∥𝐾 𝑘 − 𝐾 P ∥ □ ≤ 𝜖/2.

Note that the parts of P𝑘 that intersect 𝑈 (0) constitute a refinement of C𝑑in0 . Similarly, the parts of P that intersect 𝑈 (𝐿)
constitute a refinement of C𝑑out 𝐿
                                     . Note as well that 𝐾 is constant on every set of the form 𝐶 × 𝐷 or 𝐷 × 𝐶 where 𝐶 is a
part in C𝑑in0 or C𝑑out
                    𝐿
                       and 𝐷  is any    part of Q (the partition underlying 𝐾) that intersect (or equivalently, is a subset of)
  (1)
𝑈 ∪...∪𝑈         ( 𝐿−1) ∪𝑈  (bias) .



                                                                     20
Hence, by the definition of projection and since P refines L𝑟 , the kernel 𝐾 P has the same property: it is constant
on every set of the form 𝐶 × 𝐷 or 𝐷 × 𝐶 where 𝐶 is a part in C𝑑in0 or C𝑑out      𝐿
                                                                                   and 𝐷 is any part of P that intersect
  (1)
𝑈 ∪...∪𝑈       ( 𝐿−1)                             ′
                      . We define the partition P as the partition containing as parts the intervals of C𝑑in0 and C𝑑out and all
                                                                                                                     𝐿
parts of P outside C𝑑in0 and C𝑑out . By the above analysis, 𝐾   is a step graphon with respect to P ′.
                                𝐿
                                                              P


For each ℓ = 1, . . . , 𝐿 − 1, let P (ℓ ) be the set of parts of P ′ that intersect (or equivalently are subsets of) 𝑈 (ℓ ) . Similarly
define P (bias) . Note that P (ℓ ) is a partition of 𝑈 (ℓ ) and P (bias) a partition of 𝑈 (bias) . Note as well that
                                                                          2
                                           |P (bias) |, |P (ℓ ) | ≤ 22⌈16/𝜖 ⌉ (𝐿 + 𝑑0 + 𝑑 𝐿 ).

Let 𝑀 ∈ N be the lowest common multiple of 𝑑0 and 𝑑 𝐿 . Let 𝑛 = 𝐶 (𝐿 + 2) 𝑀 for some 𝐶 ∈ N to be specified later.
Now, apply the equatizing partition lemma (Lemma 18), to equatize P (ℓ ) into 𝐶 𝑀 parts E𝐶(ℓ𝑀
                                                                                            )
                                                                                              , each of measure 1/𝑛.
                   (bias)
Similarly, define E𝐶 𝑀 . Here, we restrict the choice of 𝐶 to satisfy

                                                  𝐶𝑀 >           max             |P (ℓ ) |.
                                                           ℓ=1,...,𝐿−1, (bias)

By the equatizing lemma, there exist numbers ℎ (ℓ ) ≤ |P (ℓ ) | such that the first 𝐶 𝑀 − ℎ (ℓ ) parts of E𝐶(ℓ𝑀
                                                                                                              )
                                                                                                                are the refinement
parts T𝐶(ℓ𝑀) , and the last ℎ (ℓ ) parts of E𝐶(ℓ𝑀
                                                )
                                                  are the remainder parts R𝐶(ℓ𝑀 )
                                                                                  . Similarly, we consider ℎ (bias) < |P (bias) |,
T𝐶(bias)
   𝑀     and R𝐶(bias)
                  𝑀 .

Denote E 𝑗 = ∪ℓ E𝐶(ℓ𝑀 )
                        ∪ E𝐶(bias)     in    out                                                      (ℓ )    (bias)
                               𝑀 ∪ C𝑑0 ∪ C𝑑𝐿 , where 𝑗 = |E 𝑗 | = 𝐶 𝑀 𝐿 + 𝑑 0 + 𝑑 𝐿 . Denote R = ∪ℓ R 𝐶 𝑀 ∪ R 𝐶 𝑀
and 𝑅 = ∪R. By construction, the projection 𝐾 E 𝑗 of 𝐾 upon E 𝑗 is equal to 𝐾 P for every (𝑥, 𝑦) outside the set
( [0, 1] × 𝑅) ∪ (𝑅 × [0, 1]). Note that
                                                                         ∑︁
                          𝜇(( [0, 1] × 𝑅) ∪ (𝑅 × [0, 1])) ≤ 2 ℎ (bias) +    ℎ (ℓ ) /𝑛 ≤ 2𝐿|P ′ |/𝑛.
                                                                                  
                                                                                     ℓ

Moreover, the pointwise distance between 𝐾 P and 𝐾 E 𝑗 for any (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ ( [0, 1] × 𝑅) ∪ (𝑅 × [0, 1]) is bounded by 2.
Hence,
                                   ∥𝐾 P − 𝐾 E 𝑗 ∥ □ ≤ ∥𝐾 P − 𝐾 E 𝑗 ∥ 1 ≤ 4𝐿|P ′ |/𝑛.

Hence, by the triangle inequality
                                                ∥𝐾 − 𝐾 E 𝑗 ∥ □ ≤ 𝜖/2 + 4𝐿|P ′ |/𝑛.
We retroactively choose 𝑛 such that 4𝐿|P ′ |/𝑛 ≤ 𝜖/2. For this, we choose
                                                              &        2
                                                                          '
                                                                22⌈16/𝜖 ⌉
                                             𝑛 = 8𝑀 𝐿 (𝐿 + 2)               ,
                                                                    𝜖

which leads to
                                                      2                                       2
                            4𝐿|P ′ |/𝑛 ≤ 4𝐿22⌈16/𝜖 ⌉ (𝐿 + 𝑑0 + 𝑑 𝐿 )/𝑛 ≤ 4𝐿22⌈16/𝜖 ⌉ (𝐿 + 2𝑀)/𝑛
                                               ≤ (𝐿 + 2𝑀)𝜖/2(𝑀 𝐿 + 2𝑀) ≤ 𝜖/2,
while still 𝑛 being of the form 𝐶 (𝐿 + 2) 𝑀 for some 𝐶 ∈ N

Next, we map the equipartition E 𝑗 into an interval equipartition which underlies a computational kernel, i.e., which
refines L𝑟 . For this, using Lemma 19, for each ℓ ∈ {1, . . . , 𝐿 − 1, (bias)} apply a measure preserving bijection 𝜙 (ℓ )
mapping E𝐶(ℓ𝑀 )
                into the interval equipartition I𝐶(ℓ𝑀) of 𝑈 (ℓ ) . Denote

                                       J = C𝑑in0 ∪ I𝐶(1)            (𝐿−1)
                                                      𝑀 ∪ . . . ∪ I𝐶 𝑀    ∪ I𝐶(bias) out
                                                                               𝑀 ∪ C𝑑𝐿 ,

and note that J is an interval equipartition of [0, 1] into 𝑛 parts underlying a computational kernel, i.e., refines L𝑟 .
Consider the corresponding measure preserving bijection 𝜙 over [0, 1], defined by
                                  (
                                    𝜙 (ℓ ) (𝑥), 𝑥 ∈ 𝑈 (ℓ ) , for some ℓ = 1, . . . , 𝐿 − 1, (bias)
                           𝜙(𝑥) =
                                    𝑥           otherwise.

                                                                   21
Consider the kernel 𝐾 𝜙 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝐾 (𝜙(𝑥), 𝜙(𝑦)), and note that (𝐾 𝜙 ) J is a computational kernel in CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 )
with hidden dimension                                    &           '
                                                                  2
                                                           22⌈16/𝜖 ⌉
                                               𝑑 = 8𝑀 𝐿                .
                                                               𝜖
By the above construction, this kernel satisfies the commutation property between the measure-preserving bijection and
the projection
                                                     (𝐾 𝜙 ) J = (𝐾 E 𝑗 ) 𝜙 .
This directly leads to
                                                       comp
                                                      𝛿□      (𝐾, 𝐾 J ) ≤ 𝜖 .



Network Architecture Approximation. We now use Theorem 5 and Theorem 6 to prove Corollary 7. The proof
proceeds by first enlarging the computational graph output dimension by adding unconnected computational units to
the output layer and inducing it into a kernel. We then establish a computational kernel approximation via Theorem 6.
Lastly, we use the Lipschitz continuity of graph network of Theorem 5, to bound the output.

Corollary 7 (Network Architecture Approximation). Let 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ∈ N with 𝐿 ≥ 2, let 𝐵 ≥ 𝐿 + 2, and 𝜖 > 0. Then,
for any network Θ ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) there is a network Θ′ ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) with hidden dimension
                                                                                                 
                                          1 2⌈ (16( (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 ) 2 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 )/𝜖 2 ⌉
                            𝑑 = 8𝑀 𝐿         ·2                                  (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 ,
                                          𝜖

such that ∥Θ − Θ′ ∥ ∞ < 𝜖.

Proof. Let x ∈ [0, 1] 𝑑0 be any input vector and let 𝑓x ∈ CS(𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) be its induced input signal given the parameters
𝐿, 𝑑0 , and 𝑑 𝐿 . Additionally, let 𝐾 ∈ CK (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) denote the computational kernel of Θ.

Let 𝑈 ( 𝐿) be the output layer of 𝐾 (of length 1/(𝐿 + 2)) and C𝑑out𝐿
                                                                     be the coarse output partition of 𝐾, which partitions
the interval 𝑈 ( 𝐿) into 𝑑 𝐿 intervals of length 1/(𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 , i.e. the Lebesgue measure 𝜇 of each of the intervals is
1/(𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 .

By Theorem 6, for any 𝜖 > 0, there exists a computational kernel 𝐾 ′ with hidden dimension
                                         &             2 2     2𝐿   2
                                                                                        '
                                           22⌈ (16(𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) )/𝜖 ⌉ (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿
                              𝑑 = 8𝑀 𝐿                                                    .                             (7)
                                                                  𝜖

approximating 𝐾 in cut norm with error
                                             comp                        𝜖
                                           𝛿□       (𝐾, 𝐾 ′ ) <                     .
                                                                  (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿
By Remark 3 (for any computational kernel there is a dense neural network that induces it) there exists a dense network
Θ′ ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ), with hidden dimension given by (7), that induces 𝐾 ′ .

Let 𝑗 ∈ [𝑑 𝐿 ] be any output channel and denote the 𝑗th interval of C𝑑out
                                                                       𝐿
                                                                          by 𝐼 out
                                                                               𝑗 . By Lemma 4, we have

                                                                   Θ′ (x) 𝑗 = Φ 𝐵,𝐿 𝐾 ′ , 𝑓x 𝑣 ,
                                                                                           
                                Θ(x) 𝑗 = Φ 𝐵,𝐿 𝐾, 𝑓x 𝑣 ,

whenever 𝑣 ∈ 𝐼 out
               𝑗 . Thus,

                                Θ(x) 𝑗 − Θ′ (x) 𝑗 = Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓x ) (𝑣) − Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾 ′ , 𝑓x ) (𝑣)




                                                                  22
whenever 𝑣 ∈ 𝐼 out                          out
               𝑗 . Therefore, for any 𝑣 ∈ 𝐼 𝑗 :

                                                                1       
           Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓x ) (𝑣) − Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾 ′ , 𝑓x ) (𝑣) =              𝜇 𝐼 out Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓x ) (𝑣) − Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾 ′ , 𝑓x ) (𝑣)
                                                                                                                         
                                                                         𝑗
                                                          𝜇 𝐼 out
                                                              𝑗
                                                                         ∫
                                                                                   Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓x ) (𝑢) − Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾 ′ , 𝑓x ) (𝑢) 𝑑𝑢
                                                                                                                             
                                                     = (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿
                                                                           𝐼 out
                                                                             𝑗

                                                     ≤ (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 ∥Out𝐾 , 𝑓x − Out𝐾 ′ , 𝑓x ∥ □ ,

where
                            Out𝐾 , 𝑓x := 1𝑈 (𝐿) Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾, 𝑓x ),        Out𝐾 ′ , 𝑓x := 1𝑈 ( 𝐿) Φ 𝐵,𝐿 (𝐾 ′ , 𝑓x ).
Lastly, by the Lipschitz property of the 𝐵-IR-MPNN (Theorem 5)
                                                                                               comp
                        (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 ∥Out𝐾 , 𝑓x − Out𝐾 ′ , 𝑓x ∥ □ ≤ (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 𝛿□                (𝐾, 𝐾 ′ ) < 𝜖 .

Hence,

                                                      Θ(x) 𝑗 − Θ′ (x) 𝑗 < 𝜖 .




C       Implications for Approximation
In this section, we prove our main results, providing explicit conditions under which dense deep ReLU networks fail to
be universal. In other words, for sufficiently large input dimension 𝑑0 , any dense ReLU network architecture is not dense
in Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) (the space of Lipschitz continuous functions with Lipschitz constant bounded by 1). First, we prove a
variant of Yarotsky [2017], Theorem 4., part (a), which depends only on one implicit parameter (in contrast to two in the
original theorem). Yarotsky [2017], Theorem 4. provides lower bounds on the number of computational units a network
architecture must have in order to be able to approximate any function in Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ). Then, we use these two results to
show that for a large enough input dimension, no ReLU architecture can approximate all functions with a small 𝜖 error.
This highlights an inherent limitation of dense networks.

C.1      Lower Bounds Based on VC-Dimension
We establish the following theorem by following the steps of the proof of Yarotsky [2017], Theorem 4. Theorem 8
gives a result close to the first part of Yarotsky [2017], Theorem 4, but with explicit constants restricted to Lipschitz
continuous functions.

Recall that for a hypothesis class H of Boolean functions on [0, 1] 𝑑 , the VC-dimension is the size of the largest subset
𝑆 ⊂ [0, 1] 𝑑 that can be shattered by H , i.e., on which H can realize all dichotomies (see Section 2).

Of particular interest is the case where H consists of Boolean functions obtained by thresholding the scalar output of a
ReLU network with fixed architecture and variable weights and biases. Concretely, let Θ (W,b) : [0, 1] 𝑑 → R denote the
function computed by such a network with parameters (W, b), and consider the class
                                   
                              H = 𝑥 ↦→ 1 { 𝑓 𝜃 ( 𝑥 ) >𝑎} (W, b) network parameters , 𝑎 ∈ R .

Here, the parameter 𝑎 ∈ R represents a threshold applied to the network output. When the network parameters are
unconstrained, this threshold can be fixed to 𝑎 = 0 without loss of generality, since it can be absorbed into the bias of
the last layer. We emphasize that no margin assumption is imposed here; the thresholding is purely combinatorial and
used only to define a Boolean-valued hypothesis class.

In this setting, Anthony and Bartlett [2009], Theorem 8.7 shows that the VC-dimension satisfies

                                                     VCdim(H ) ≤ 𝑐 · 𝑊 2 ,                                                         (8)


                                                                    23
where 𝑊 is the total number of weights in the network and 𝑐 is a universal constant independent of the architecture.
Recall that Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) denotes the space of 1-Lipschitz continuous functions from [0, 1] 𝑑0 to R𝑑𝐿 bounded by 1.
Theorem 7 of Harvey et al. [2017] presents an explicit bound that improves upon the classical VC-dimension bound in
Equation (8), showing that the universal constant 𝑐 is in fact small.

Theorem 8. For any 𝜖 ∈ (0, 1/3), a ReLU network architecture capable of approximating every function 𝑓 ∈ Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 )
with error bounded by 𝜖 must have at least 𝑐 −1/2 (6𝜖) −𝑑0 /2 parameters, where 𝑐 is the absolute constant defined above.

Proof. We first reduce to the case of a scalar output. Since the Lipschitz constant and the approximation error are
defined using the infinity norm over the output, every output channel can be treated independently. Hence, it suffices to
prove the result for 𝑑 𝐿 = 1.

Given a positive integer 𝑁 to be chosen later, choose 𝑆 as a set of 𝑁 𝑑0 points x1 , . . . , x 𝑁 𝑑0 in the cube [0, 1] 𝑑0 such that
the Euclidean distance between any pair of them is not less than 𝑁1 . Given any assignment of values 𝑦 1 , . . . , 𝑦 𝑁 𝑑0 ∈ R,
we can construct a Lipschitz continuous function 𝑓 satisfying 𝑓 (x𝑚 ) = 𝑦 𝑚 for all 𝑚 by setting
                                                              𝑁 𝑑0
                                                              ∑︁                      
                                                 𝑓 (x) =             𝑦 𝑚 𝜙 𝑁 (x − x𝑚 ) ,                                       (9)
                                                              𝑚=1

with 𝜙 : R𝑑0 → R such that 𝜙(x) = 1 − 2∥x∥ 2 if 0 ≤ ∥𝑥∥ 2 < 12 and 𝜙(x) = 0 if ∥x∥ ≥ 21 . Notice that 𝑓 is continuous
and differentiable almost everywhere. Let us obtain a condition ensuring that such 𝑓 ∈ Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ). It is easy to see that

                        max | 𝑓 (x)| ≤ max |𝑦 𝑚 |       and       max |∇ 𝑓 (x)| = 𝑁 max |𝑦 𝑚 | max |∇𝜙(x)|.
                          x               𝑚                          x                           𝑚        x

Thus, we obtain
                                                 max |∇ 𝑓 (x)| ≤ 2𝑁 max |𝑦 𝑚 |.                                               (10)
                                                    𝑥                              𝑚
                             1
Therefore, if max𝑚 |𝑦 𝑚 | ≤ 2𝑁 , then is 1-Lipschitz. Now, set

                                                                            1
                                                                  𝑁=           .                                              (11)
                                                                            6𝜖
Then maxx | 𝑓 (x)| ≤ 3𝜖. In particular, when 𝜖 ≤ 1/3, maxx | 𝑓 (x)| ≤ 1. Therefore, 𝑓 ∈ Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ). Suppose that there
is a ReLU network architecture 𝜂 that can approximate, by adjusting its weights, any 𝑓 ∈ Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) with error less
than 𝜖. By Θ (W,b) (x), we denote the output of the network with parameters (W, b).

Consider any assignment z of Boolean values 𝑧 1 , . . . , 𝑧 𝑁 𝑑0 ∈ {0, 1}. Set
                                                         𝑧𝑚
                                                 𝑦𝑚 =       ,            𝑚 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 𝑑0 ,
                                                         2𝑁
and let 𝑓 be given by Equation (9); then Equation (10) holds and hence 𝑓 ∈ Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ). By assumption, there exist
fixed parameters (W𝑧 , b𝑧 ), such that for all 𝑚 we have

                                                    |Θ (W𝑧 ,b𝑧 ) (x𝑚 ) − 𝑦 𝑚 | ≤ 𝜖,

and in particular                                             (
                                                                     1        1
                                                                  ≥ 2𝑁 − 𝜖 > 4𝑁 ,           if 𝑧 𝑚 = 1,
                                       Θ (W𝑧 ,b𝑧 ) (x𝑚 ) =               1
                                                                  ≤ 𝜖 < 4𝑁 ,                if 𝑧 𝑚 = 0,
                                                           1
so the thresholded network Θ̂ (W𝑧 ,b𝑧 ) = 1(Θ (W𝑧 ,b𝑧 ) > 4𝑁 ) has outputs

                                           Θ̂ (W𝑧 ,b𝑧 ) (x𝑚 ) = 𝑧 𝑚 ,          𝑚 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 𝑑0 .

Since the Boolean values 𝑧 𝑚 were arbitrary, we conclude that the subset 𝑆 is shattered and hence

                                                         VCdim( Θ̂) ≥ 𝑁 𝑑0 .


                                                                         24
Expressing 𝑁 through 𝜖 with Equation (11), we obtain

                                                    VCdim( Θ̂) ≥ (6𝜖) −𝑑0 .                                               (12)

To establish the Theorem, we apply the inequality in Equation (8) to the network Θ̂:

                                                     VCdim( Θ̂) ≤ 𝑐𝑊 2 ,                                                  (13)

where 𝑊 is the number of weights in 𝜂1 , which is the same as in 𝜂 if we do not count the threshold parameter. Combining
Equation (12) with Equation (13), we obtain the desired lower bound

                                                    𝑊 ≥ 𝑐 −1/2 (6𝜖) −𝑑0 /2 .



Next, we relate the number of parameters of a neural network in N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) to the hidden and input dimensions,
using formulae compatible with Corollary 7 and Theorem 8 with the choice of 𝜖 = 1/8. This correspondence will be
used to derive the expressivity bound on strongly dense neural networks.

Lemma 20. Let 𝜖 0 = 1/8. Let 𝐵 ≥ 1, 𝐿, 𝑑 𝐿 ∈ N, and let 𝑐 be the constant from Theorem 8. Let 𝑑0 satisfy

                   𝑑0 ≥ 17 log2 𝑐1/2 𝐿 3 (𝐿 + 2) 2 𝑑 4𝐿 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 + 17 · 214 (𝐿 + 2) 2 𝑑 2𝐿 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 + 306.
                                                               
                                                                                                                          (14)

Consider the family H 𝜖0 of ReLU networks with strictly less than 𝑐 −1/2 (6𝜖 0 ) −𝑑0 /2 parameters. Then, the space of dense
neural networks in N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) with hidden dimension
                                           &             2 2     2𝐿         2
                                                                                                 '
                                             22⌈ (16(𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) )/( 𝜖0 /2) ⌉ (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿
                              𝑑 = 8𝑀 𝐿
                                                                   (𝜖0 /2)

is a subset of H 𝜖0 .

Proof. We now show that any network Θ ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) with hidden dimension
                                    &             2 2     2𝐿         2
                                                                                          '
                                      22⌈ (16(𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) )/( 𝜖0 /2) ⌉ (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿
                           𝑑 = 8𝑀 𝐿
                                                            (𝜖0 /2)

has fewer than 𝑐 −1/2 (6𝜖0 ) −𝑑0 /2 parameters. By substituting 𝜖 0 = 1/8 and collecting powers of 2, we obtain
             &              2 2     2𝐿         2
                                                                    '
               22⌈ (16( 𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) )/( 𝜖0 /2) ⌉ (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿    l    12    2 2     2𝐿
                                                                                                                 m
                                                                      = 22⌈2 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) ⌉+4 (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿
                                      (𝜖0 /2)



Notice that
              l    12     2 2     2𝐿
                                                        m     12    2 2      2𝐿
                                                                                                          
               22⌈2 ( 𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) ⌉+4 (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 ≤ 22(2 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) +1)+4 (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 + 1
                                                           13     2 2     2𝐿
                                                                                                     
                                                         = 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) +6 (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 + 1

Therefore,
                                              13      2 2     2𝐿 +6
                               𝑑 ≤ 8𝑀 𝐿 · 22 ( 𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)           (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 + 8𝑀 𝐿
                                               13      2 2      2𝐿 +6
                                  = 23 𝑀 𝐿 · 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)           (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 + 23 𝑀 𝐿
                                                                 13        2 2    2𝐿 +9
                                  = (𝑀 𝐿 (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 )22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)              + 23 𝑀 𝐿.


                                                              25
Since 𝑀 ≤ 𝑑0 𝑑 𝐿 , we have
                                                                      13        2          2𝐿 +9
                                𝑑 ≤ (𝑑0 𝑑 2𝐿 𝐿 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿 )22 (𝐿+2) (2𝐵)                       + 23 𝑑0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿.

We now calculate 𝑊, the number of parameters (including both the weights and the biases) of Θ. We have

                                        𝑊 = (𝐿 − 1)𝑑 2 + (𝑑0 + 𝑑 𝐿 + 𝐿 − 1)𝑑 + 𝑑 𝐿 ,

since there are (𝐿 − 1)𝑑 2 + (𝑑0 + 𝑑 𝐿 )𝑑 weights and (𝐿 − 1)𝑑 + 𝑑 𝐿 biases in a fixed-width network.

Since 𝑑 ≥ 𝑑 𝐿 , we have

                                        (𝑑0 + 𝑑 𝐿 + 𝐿 − 1)𝑑 + 𝑑 𝐿 ≤ (𝑑0 + 𝑑 𝐿 + 𝐿)𝑑.

Since 𝐿 ≥ 2, we have

                                                  (𝑑0 + 𝑑 𝐿 + 𝐿)𝑑 ≤ 𝑑0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿𝑑.

Thus

                          𝑊 = (𝐿 − 1)𝑑 2 + (𝑑0 + 𝑑 𝐿 + 𝐿 − 1)𝑑 + 𝑑 𝐿 ≤ (𝐿 − 1)𝑑 2 + 𝑑0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿𝑑.
                                             13         2 2   2𝐿 +9
The bound 𝑑 ≤ (𝑑0 𝑑 2𝐿 𝐿 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿 )22 ( 𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)            + 23 𝑑0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿 yields
                                                                  13      2 2     2𝐿
                                                                                                     2
                        𝑊 ≤ (𝐿 − 1)       𝑑0 𝑑 2𝐿 𝐿 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) +9 + 23 𝑑0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿
                                                                    13      2 2     2𝐿
                                                                                                      
                             + 𝑑0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿 𝑑0 𝑑 2𝐿 𝐿 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) +9 + 23 𝑑0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿
                                                                 2  13     2 2     2𝐿
                                                                                           2
                           = (𝐿 − 1) 𝑑0 𝑑 2𝐿 𝐿 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿         22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) +9
                                                                             13        2 2  2𝐿
                             + (𝐿 − 1)23 𝑑0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿 𝑑0 𝑑 2𝐿 𝐿 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) +9
                                                       2
                             + (𝐿 − 1) 23 𝑑0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿
                                                                       13    2 2     2𝐿
                                                                                           
                             + 𝑑0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿 (𝑑0 𝑑 2𝐿 𝐿 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿 )22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) +9
                                                     
                             + 𝑑 0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿 23 𝑑 0 𝑑 𝐿 𝐿
                                                                           14        2 2           2𝐿 +18
                           = (𝐿 − 1)𝑑02 𝑑 4𝐿 𝐿 2 (𝐿 + 2) 2 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)
                                                                           13        2 2           2𝐿 +12
                             + (𝐿 − 1)𝑑02 𝑑 3𝐿 𝐿 2 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)
                             + (𝐿 − 1)26 𝑑02 𝑑 2𝐿 𝐿 2
                                                              13        2 2          2𝐿 +9
                             + 𝑑02 𝑑 3𝐿 𝐿 2 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)
                             + 23 𝑑02 𝑑 3𝐿 𝐿 2 =: (∗)

Notice that
                                                                                13           2 2         2𝐿 +9
                      (𝐿 − 1)26 𝑑02 𝑑 2𝐿 𝐿 2 + 𝑑02 𝑑 3𝐿 𝐿 2 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)                      + 23 𝑑02 𝑑 3𝐿 𝐿 2
                                                                                      13           2 2       2𝐿 +9
                                        ≤ 2 · 𝑑02 𝑑 3𝐿 𝐿 2 (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)
                                                                                13           2 2         2𝐿 +10
                                        = 𝑑02 𝑑 3𝐿 𝐿 2 (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)
                                                                                13           2 2         2𝐿 +12
                                        ≤ 𝑑02 𝑑 3𝐿 𝐿 2 (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)




                                                                   26
Thus
                                                                            13     2 2          2𝐿 +12
                                     (𝐿 − 1)𝑑02 𝑑 3𝐿 𝐿 2 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)
                                        + (𝐿 − 1)26 𝑑02 𝑑 2𝐿 𝐿 2
                                                                       13        2 2         2𝐿 +9
                                        + 𝑑02 𝑑 3𝐿 𝐿 2 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)
                                        + 23 𝑑02 𝑑 3𝐿 𝐿 2
                                                                                   14          2 2        2𝐿 +18
                                     ≤ (𝐿 + 2) 𝑀 𝑑02 𝑑 4𝐿 𝐿 2 (𝐿 + 2) (2𝐵) 2𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)
                                                                       14        2 2         2𝐿 +18
                                     = 𝑑02 𝑑 4𝐿 𝐿 2 (𝐿 + 2) 2 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)

All in all, we get
                                                                            14         2 2      2𝐿 +18
                                     (∗) ≤ 𝑑02 𝑑 4𝐿 𝐿 3 (𝐿 + 2) 2 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)
                                                                            14         2 2      2𝐿 +18
                                         ≤ 𝑑02 𝑑 4𝐿 𝐿 3 (𝐿 + 2) 2 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 22 (𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵)                := 𝑊
                                                                                                             e

That is, 𝑊 ≤ 𝑊
             e . We seek a condition on 𝑑0 such that
                                                                        𝑑0 /2
                                                            e ≤ 𝑐 −1/2 8
                                                            𝑊                   ,
                                                                       6

which implies 𝑊 ≤ 𝑐 −1/2 (6𝜖0 ) −𝑑0 /2 . Taking logarithms, this condition is equivalent to
                                                                       
                                                         e ≤ 𝑑0 log 4 .
                                                 log 𝑐1/2𝑊
                                                           
                                                                 2      3

Substituting the expression for 𝑊
                                e yields
                                                                                                               
                         1/2 3                                                              𝑑0                 4
                                 (𝐿 + 2) 2 𝑑 4𝐿 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 + 214 (𝐿 + 2) 2 𝑑 2𝐿 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 + 18 ≤
                                                       
                log2 𝑐      𝐿                                                                  log                − 2 log(𝑑0 ).
                                                                                                      2        3

A direct calculation shows that for all 𝑑0 > 1800,
                                                                     
                                                      1      𝑑0      4
                                                        𝑑0 ≤    log     − 2 log(𝑑0 ).
                                                     17      2       3
Therefore, it suffices to require

                         17 log2 𝑐1/2 𝐿 3 (𝐿 + 2) 2 𝑑 4𝐿 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 + 17 · 214 (𝐿 + 2) 2 𝑑 2𝐿 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 + 306 ≤ 𝑑0 ,
                                                                

which is precisely Equation (14).

From the above theorem, we get the following.

Theorem 9 (Expressivity Bound of Strongly Dense Neural Networks). Let 𝐿, 𝑑 𝐿 ∈ N with 𝐿 ≥ 2, let 𝐵 ≥ 𝐿 + 2, and let
𝑐 be the constant from Theorem 8. Let 𝑑0 satisfy

                     𝑑0 ≥ 17 log2 𝑐1/2 𝐿 3 (𝐿 + 2) 2 𝑑 4𝐿 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 + 17 · 214 (𝐿 + 2) 2 𝑑 2𝐿 (2𝐵) 2𝐿 + 306.
                                                                 

Then N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) is not a universal approximator of Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ).

Proof. Fix 𝜖 0 := 1/8. Consider the family H 𝜖0 of ReLU networks with at most 𝑐 −1/2 (6𝜖0 ) −𝑑0 /2 parameters. By
Theorem 8, there exists 𝑓 ∈ Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) such that no function from H 𝜖0 can approximate it with error less than 𝜖0 . On
the other hand, by Lemma 20 the space of dense neural networks N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) with hidden dimension
                                          &             2 2     2𝐿         2
                                                                                                '
                                            22⌈ (16(𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) )/( 𝜖0 /2) ⌉ (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿
                             𝑑 = 8𝑀 𝐿
                                                                  (𝜖0 /2)


                                                                     27
is a subset of H 𝜖0 .

Suppose, for the sake of contradiction, that N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) is a universal approximator of Lip(𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ). Then
there exists Θ ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) such that

                                                        ∥ 𝑓 − Θ∥ ∞ ≤ 𝜖0 /2.


By Corollary 7, any dense ReLU network Θ ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) admits an equivalent dense ReLU network
Θ′ ∈ N N dense (𝐵, 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) with controlled hidden dimension
                                              &             2 2     2𝐿    2
                                                                                              '
                                                22⌈ (16(𝐿+2) 𝑑𝐿 (2𝐵) )/𝜖0 ⌉ (𝐿 + 2)𝑑 𝐿 (2𝐵) 𝐿
                                    𝑑 = 8𝑀 𝐿
                                                                       𝜖0

such that
                                                       ∥Θ − Θ′ ∥ ∞ ≤ 𝜖0 /2.
By the triangle inequality,
                                           ∥ 𝑓 − Θ′ ∥ ∞ ≤ ∥ 𝑓 − Θ∥ ∞ + ∥Θ − Θ′ ∥ ∞ ≤ 𝜖0 .
This contradiction completes the proof.


D      Experiments
We empirically test the theoretical prediction that increasing width in dense networks leads to early saturation in
performance. We use fully connected one-hidden-layer ReLU networks in PyTorch, trained on MNIST with the
Adam optimizer (learning rate 10−3 , batch size 128, 20 epochs). We consider two training modes: A Standard
mode, where networks are trained without constraints and a Dense mode, where weights are clamped after each
optimizer step to the interval [−10/𝑑𝑖−1 , 10/𝑑𝑖−1 ], where 𝑑𝑖−1 is the input dimension of the layer. We vary the
hidden-layer width from small to highly overparameterized regimes, recording final training and test accuracy for each
setting. Experiments were run on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3050 6GB GPU. The code is available at https:
//github.com/levi776/Dense-Neural-Networks-are-not-Universal-Approximators.

Results. Standard networks improve rapidly in the underparameterized regime and reach almost perfect performance,
with training accuracy stabilizing around 98–99%. Dense networks plateau earlier, with training accuracy around
90–91%, and achieve lower test accuracy across all widths, creating a persistent performance gap. This supports the
theoretical prediction that width beyond a certain scale does not further increase the effective expressive power of dense
networks.

            Width       Standard Train Acc (%)    Dense Train Acc (%)    Standard Test Acc (%)   Dense Test Acc (%)
                1             29.5 ± 6.8               27.8 ± 6.2              29.5 ± 6.8            27.9 ± 6.2
                2            50.5 ± 11.6              43.3 ± 12.1             50.5 ± 11.5           43.6 ± 11.7
                4             81.0 ± 2.9               77.0 ± 4.8              80.7 ± 3.1            77.5 ± 5.1
                8             90.0 ± 1.4               86.5 ± 1.0              89.5 ± 1.1            86.8 ± 0.8
               16             94.5 ± 1.9               89.2 ± 0.2              93.8 ± 1.6            89.6 ± 0.2
               32             96.9 ± 2.6               89.9 ± 0.4              95.8 ± 2.1            90.2 ± 0.4
               64             98.2 ± 3.1               90.5 ± 0.5              96.8 ± 2.5            90.8 ± 0.5
              128             98.9 ± 2.8               90.8 ± 0.3              97.3 ± 2.1            91.1 ± 0.4
              256             98.9 ± 2.8               90.6 ± 0.4              97.5 ± 2.2            90.8 ± 0.4
              512             98.9 ± 3.0               90.8 ± 0.3              97.5 ± 2.5            91.1 ± 0.4
             1024             98.9 ± 2.9               90.9 ± 0.4              97.5 ± 2.2            91.2 ± 0.4
             2048             98.7 ± 3.1               90.8 ± 0.4              97.3 ± 2.5            91.0 ± 0.4

Table 1: Training and test accuracy on MNIST for standard and dense one-hidden-layer ReLU networks as a function of width. Dense
networks enforce per-layer weight constraints [−10/𝑑𝑖−1 , 10/𝑑𝑖−1 ]. Values denote mean ± standard deviation over random seeds.



                                                                28
E      Deep Neural Networks as Graph-Based Models
In this section, we define the computational graph of a feedforward network and formalize, in Lemma 21, the connection
between graph-based neural computations and ReLU networks. We then present Lemma 22, which is a direct
consequence of the analysis in Appendix E of Levie [2023] and Rauchwerger and Levie [2025], connecting graph-based
neural computations to kernel-based neural computations.

Graph Neural Networks and specifically message passing networks (MPNNs), form a class of neural networks designed
to process graph-structured data [Xu et al., 2019, Rossi et al., 2023] by iteratively updating node embeddings through the
exchange of messages between nodes. Unlike general trainable MPNNs, we consider the following special predefined
network.

SR-MPNN. Let 𝐿 ∈ N; the 𝐿-layer sum-ReLU MPNN (SR-MPNN) processes attributed graphs into output vertex
attributes as follows. The SR-MPNN is applied on an attributed graph (𝐺, f) with adjacency matrix A = ( 𝐴𝑖, 𝑗 )𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]
as the function defined by Ψ𝐿 (𝐺, f) := f ( 𝐿) , where f (0) := f and for each layer ℓ = 1, . . . , 𝐿 − 1 the update rule is:

                                                            © 1 ∑︁
                                          f (ℓ ) (𝑖) := ReLU­         𝐴𝑖, 𝑗 f (ℓ −1) ( 𝑗) ® .                                  (15)
                                                                                          ª
                                                              𝑛
                                                            « 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]                     ¬
The output is computed like in Equation (15) with ℓ = 𝐿, without ReLU.

The computational graph of a neural network. To represent a feedforward neural network within the SR-MPNN
framework, we associate it with a directed computational graph in which vertices may be repeated. These repetitions are
a technical but essential feature of the construction.

Intuitively, when a feedforward network is implemented as an SR-MPNN on its computational graph, message passing
uses normalized sum aggregation. If each neuron were represented by a single vertex, this normalization would
excessively downscale signals as they propagate through the layers, so that the resulting SR-MPNN would no longer
implements the intended feedforward computation. To balance the contributions of different neurons and ensure that
signal magnitudes are preserved across layers, we therefore repeat each input, bias, and output neuron several times; the
precise reason for this repetition will become clear later in the analysis.

A partition of the vertex set 𝑉 of a graph is a sequence of subsets (𝑉 𝑗 ⊂ 𝑉) 𝐽𝑗=1 such that ∪ 𝑗 𝑉 𝑗 = 𝑉 and 𝑉 𝑗 ∩ 𝑉𝑖 = ∅ for
every 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗. The partition is called balanced if |𝑉𝑖 | = |𝑉 𝑗 | for every 𝑖, 𝑗, where |𝑉𝑖 | is the number of vertices in 𝑉𝑖 .

We call a graph 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸), with an adjacency matrix A = ( 𝐴𝑣,𝑢 ) 𝑣,𝑢∈ [𝑛] , a depth-𝐿 computational graph with respect
to the parameters 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ∈ N, if 𝐺 satisfies the following four conditions.

• Condition 1. The graph is a weighted graph. The size of the graph 𝑛 is divisible by 𝑀 (𝐿 + 2), where 𝑀 is the least
  common multiple of 𝑑0 and 𝑑 𝐿 .
    Notation: The vertex set 𝑉 is endowed with a balanced partition into 𝐿 + 2 sets of size 𝑑 := 𝑛/(𝐿 + 2):
                                           𝑉 = 𝑉 (0) ∪ 𝑉 (1) ∪ · · · ∪ 𝑉 (𝐿) ∪ 𝑉 ( (bias) ) ,
  where each 𝑉 (ℓ ) , ℓ = 0, . . . , 𝐿, is called layers, and 𝑉 ( (bias) ) is called the bias. Specifically, we call 𝑉 (0) the input
  layer and 𝑉 ( 𝐿) the output layer. The layers 𝑉 (0) and 𝑉 (𝐿) are endowed with balanced partitions (𝑉𝑖(in) )𝑖=1            𝑑0
                                                                                                                                 and
     (out) 𝑑𝐿                                                                                                (in) 𝑑0
  (𝑉𝑖     )𝑖=1 into 𝑑0 and 𝑑 𝐿 cells, respectively, each part having size 𝑑/𝑑0 and 𝑑/𝑑 𝐿 . We call (𝑉𝑖 )𝑖=1 input partition
  and (𝑉𝑖(out) )𝑖=1
                𝑑𝐿
                    the output partition.

• Condition 2. The graph satisfies 𝐴𝑣,𝑢 = 𝐴𝑣,𝑢′ whenever 𝑢 and 𝑢 ′ belong to the same subset in (𝑉𝑖(in) )𝑖=1𝑑0
                                                                                                               . Moreover,
                                 ′                                  (out)  𝑑𝐿
  𝐴𝑣,𝑢 = 𝐴𝑣 ′ ,𝑢 whenever 𝑣 and 𝑣 belong to the same interval of (𝑉𝑖      )𝑖=1 . In addition, 𝐴𝑣,𝑢 = 𝐴𝑣,𝑢′ whenever 𝑢 and
  𝑢 ′ belong to 𝑉 (bias) .
• Condition 3. The graph satisfies 𝐴𝑣,𝑢 = 0 whenever either 𝑢 ∈ 𝑉 (ℓ ) and 𝑣 ∉ 𝑉 (ℓ+1) for some ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , 𝐿 − 1}, or
  𝑢 ∈ 𝑉 (bias) and 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 (0) , or 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 (bias) and 𝑢 ∉ 𝑉 (bias) .


                                                                 29
• Condition 4. For any 𝑣, 𝑢 ∈ 𝑉 (bias) , 𝐴𝑣,𝑢 = (𝐿 + 2).

We call 𝑑0 the input dimension, 𝑑 𝐿 the output dimension, and refer to 𝑑 as the hidden dimension for ℓ = 1, . . . , 𝐿 − 1.
By CG(𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ), we denote the collection of all depth-𝐿 computational graphs as defined above.

Computational Node Feature Vectors. Given parameters 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 , a computational node feature vector is any node
feature vector which is constant on each part in 𝐶𝑑in0 and 𝐶𝑑out 𝐿
                                                                   , and constant on 𝑉 (bias) . We define a computational input
node feature vector as any computational node feature vector satisfying f (𝑣) = 0 for all 𝑣 ∉ 𝑉 (0) ∪ 𝑉 (bias) . The values
of f on the sets of 𝐶𝑑in0 are interpreted as the input vector to the network, while the constant value on 𝑉 (bias) represents a
bias signal that is present at every layer. Condition 4 of computational graph, i.e., 𝐴𝑣,𝑢 = (𝐿 + 2) for all 𝑣, 𝑢 ∈ 𝑉 (bias) ,
ensures that this bias signal is unchanged during propagation, i.e., under successive applications of the computational
kernel on the signal.

Computational Graph Induced by Network Parameters. Given a neural network, one can induce a computational
graph on which the SR-MPNN implements the forward propagation of the neural network. Let (W, b) be the parameters
of the neural network Θ (W,b) ∈ N N (𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ), with hidden dimension 𝑑 divisible by 𝑑0 and 𝑑 𝐿 . Denote 𝑛 = 𝑑 (𝐿 + 2).
We define the computational graph 𝐺 = 𝐺 (W,b) ∈ CG(𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ) induced by Θ (W,b) as follows. For every (𝑣, 𝑢) ∈ [𝑛] 2 :

• 𝐴𝑣,𝑢 = 𝑊𝑖,(1)𝑗 if 𝑢 is in 𝑉 𝑗(in) and 𝑣 is the 𝑖th vertex of 𝑉 (1) .

• 𝐴𝑣,𝑢 = 𝑊𝑖,( 𝐿)
              𝑗 if 𝑢 is the 𝑗th vertex of 𝑉
                                            ( 𝐿−1) and 𝑣 is in 𝑉 (out) .
                                                                𝑖

• For ℓ = 2, . . . , 𝐿 − 1, 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑊𝑖,(ℓ𝑗) if 𝑦 is the 𝑗th vertex of 𝑉 (ℓ −1) and 𝑥 is the 𝑖th vertex of 𝑉 (ℓ ) .

• For ℓ = 2, . . . , 𝐿 − 1, 𝐴𝑣,𝑢 = 𝑏 𝑖(ℓ ) if 𝑢 is in 𝑉 (bias) and 𝑣 is the 𝑖th interval of 𝑉 (ℓ ) . Moreover, 𝐾 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑏 𝑖(𝐿) if 𝑦 is
  in 𝑈 (bias) and 𝑥 is in 𝑉𝑖(out) .

We encode an input vector x ∈ R𝑑0 as node attributes fx : 𝑉 → R defined by
                                                            𝑥,     if 𝑣 is in 𝑉𝑖(in) ,
                                                            𝑖
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                  fx (𝑣) := 1,      if 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉(bias) ,
                                                           
                                                            0,
                                                           
                                                                    otherwise.
                                                           

In the above construction, when writing “the 𝑗th cell of the partition...” we implicitly assume that the cells are always
sorted in increasing order.

Networks as SR-MPNNs. Lemma 21 shows that the output of a 𝐵-strongly dense neural network can be expressed in
terms of the 𝐿-layer SR-MPNN applied to its induced computational kernel.

Lemma 21. Let (W, b) be the parameters of Θ (W,b) ∈ N N (𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ). Then, for any input x ∈ R𝑑0 and output
channel 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 𝐿 ], we have                                      
                                  Θ (W,b) (x)𝑖 = Ψ𝐿 𝐺 (W,b) , 𝑓x 𝑣 ,

whenever 𝑣 is in 𝑉𝑖(out) .

The proof of Lemma 21 follows the same steps as the proof of Lemma 4.

Computational Kernel as An Induced Computational Graph We call any depth-𝐿 computational graph with
respect to the parameters 𝐿, 𝑑0 , 𝑑 𝐿 ∈ N a dense computational graph with bound 𝐵 if the graph is [−𝐵, 𝐵]-weighted for
some 𝐵 ≥ 𝐿 + 2. In this case, we can induce the computational graph into a computational kernel using the method
introduced in Section 2.




                                                                   30
Levie [2023], Rauchwerger and Levie [2025] show that applying an MPNN to an attributed graph and then inducing an
attributed kernel yields the same representation as first inducing the attributed kernel and then applying the MPNN (see
e.g. Appendix E in Rauchwerger and Levie [2025]). A direct result of this theorem in our setting is stated as follows.

Lemma 22. Let 𝐿 ∈ N and 𝐵 ∈ R. For any [−𝐵, 𝐵]-weighted attributed graph (𝐺, f) with node set [𝑛], applying
an 𝐿-layer 𝐵-IR-MPNN to its induced attributed kernel (𝐾𝐺 , 𝑓f ) corresponds to applying the standard 𝐿-layer ReLU
graph network to 𝐺 in the following way: for every 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] and every 𝑥 in the interval 𝐼𝑖 :

                                           Φ(𝐺, f) (𝑖) = Φ 𝐿,𝐵 (𝐾𝐺 , 𝑓f ) (𝑥).




                                                           31
