bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           Network shape intelligence outperforms AlphaFold2 intelligence in vanilla protein
           interaction prediction.

           Ilyes Abdelhamid1,5,†, Alessandro Muscoloni1,4,5,†, Danny Marc Rotscher6, Matthias Lieber6,
           Ulf Markwardt6 and Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci1,2,3,4,5*.

           1Center for Complex Network Intelligence (CCNI), Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence (THBI),


           Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
           2Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

           3Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

           4Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

           5Biomedical Cybernetics Group, Biotechnology Center (BIOTEC), Center for Molecular and Cellular


           Bioengineering (CMCB), Department of Physics, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
           6Center for Information Services and High-Performance Computing (ZIH), Technische Universität Dresden,


           Dresden, Germany.
           † First co-authorship
           *Corresponding author: Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci (kalokagathos.agon@gmail.com)


           Abstract
           For decades, scientists and engineers have been working to predict protein interactions,
           and network topology methods have emerged as extensively studied techniques.
           Recently, approaches based on AlphaFold2 intelligence, exploiting 3D molecular
           structural information, have been proposed for protein interaction prediction, they are
           promising as potential alternatives to traditional laboratory experiments, and their
           design and performance evaluation is compelling.
           Here, we introduce a new concept of intelligence termed Network Shape Intelligence
           (NSI). NSI is modelled via network automata rules which minimize external links in
           local communities according to a brain-inspired principle, as it draws upon the local
           topology and plasticity rationales initially devised in brain network science and then
           extended to any complex network. We show that by using only local network
           information and without the need for training, these network automata designed for
           modelling and predicting network connectivity can outperform AlphaFold2 intelligence
           in vanilla protein interactions prediction. We find that the set of interactions
           mispredicted by AlphaFold2 predominantly consists of proteins whose amino acids
           exhibit higher probability of being associated with intrinsically disordered regions.
           Finally, we suggest that the future advancements in AlphaFold intelligence could
           integrate principles of NSI to further enhance the modelling and structural prediction
           of protein interactions.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           Introduction
           AlphaFold21 (AF2) is a deep-learning artificial intelligence (AI) algorithm that has
           made accurate the computational prediction of protein structures from amino acid
           sequences, attaining unimaginable performance in the blind test for protein structure
           prediction CASP141. Recently, a second type of AI based on large language modelling
           called ESMFold2 has been introduced. ESMFold achieves lower performance than AF2,
           but it does not require multiple sequence alignment (MSA). Meanwhile, Evans et al.
           have released AlphaFold2-multimer (AFM), a refined version of AlphaFold2 for the
           prediction of protein complexes3. This breakthrough of AF2 and AFM has sparked
           interest in structural-based (a.k.a. structurally resolved) prediction of protein-protein
           interactions (PPIs)4–6, and its results are viewed as a milestone towards the structurally
           resolved human protein interaction network7 . Gao et al.6 has shown that the likelihood
           of complex formation can be assessed by two measures: the interface-score (IS) and the
           predicted interface TM-score (piTM), both of which evaluate the confidence of the
           predicted protein-protein interface if found in an assessed model. Each of these two
           scores range from 0 to 1, higher score indicates higher confidence and can be used to
           predict interacting protein pairs using AFM. This is not surprising, as the interface
           structures of PPIs are not fundamentally different from those that drive protein folding.
           However, for protein interaction prediction the use of homologous structures as
           templates is crucial, as AFM often fails to predict the correct structure without them8.
           Meanwhile, in network science, the increasing coverage of the protein interactome9–13
           has also led to the development of local network topology measures for reliability
           estimation14 and prediction of protein interactions15–17. These network-based methods
           exploit topological path-based patterns of already mapped interactions to predict the
           likelihood of missing interactions. This is a vanilla protein interaction prediction since
           3D molecular structural information is neither used for training nor predicted. Hence,
           the information required as input for network-based methods is the mere network shape:
           meaning a binary adjacency matrix indicating the presence or absence of an unweighted
           and undirected link between each pair of network’s nodes. Therefore, the structural-
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           based interaction prediction can be viewed as a sub-case of vanilla protein interaction
           prediction that not only predicts the likelihood of the interaction but also the 3D
           molecular structure.
           While most local rules for modeling network connectivity were based on paths of length
           214,15 (Fig. 1a), in 2015 our group18 proposed to use paths of length 3 (Fig. 1b) in
           complex bipartite networks. We argued that the accepted notion according to which the
           common neighbor nodes of a complex network should be associated to the triadic
           closure principle16 is incomplete and misleading, and that the closure rule to define the
           common neighbors is dependent by the connectivity rationale that is behind the
           complex network topology18. For instance, in bipartite networks (Fig. 1b), the
           connectivity rationale is not based on similarity between nodes but on their
           complementarity, such as the interactions in recommender systems19,20 that can be only
           between a user and an item (direct interactions between users or between items are not
           possible). This implies that in bipartite networks the common neighbor nodes are
           associated to a quadratic closure principle18, which is the closure structure of minimum
           topological length characterizing the complementarity connectivity rationale. Therefore,
           according to our theoretical framework, common neighbors are the intermediate nodes
           traversed by all the paths of length 3 between two seed nodes (Fig 1b). In case of paths
           of length n, we propose to adopt the general definition: ‘local ring’ closure21. In 2018,
           our group22 successfully exploited this path-length 3 rationale for network-based
           prediction of drug-target interactions, which are biological networks based on bipartite
           complementarity connectivity. In a preprint (in 2018)23 and in the respective peer
           reviewed publication (in 2019)16, Kovács et al. highlighted that a path-length 3
           complementary connectivity rationale - similar to the one discovered by our group18 for
           bipartite networks - plays a major role also in the monopartite organization of protein
           interaction networks, because of 3D-structural and evolutionary bio-principles that
           govern this class of monopartite networks. They proposed a new path-length 3 measure
           called L3 for topological prediction of protein interactions, and they showed that L3
           could outperform Cannistraci Resource Allocation (CRA)15 which was the best
           performing path-length 2 method in literature out of 23 different methods tested in their
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           study16. Kovács et al. L3 network modelling was introduced according to biologically
           sound rationales valid for protein networks only, and its mathematical definition as a
           mechanistic model lacks derivation from current theoretical knowledge, missing any
           connection to already known generalized principles for modelling and prediction of
           network connectivity.
           In 2018, around 2 months after and in reply to the pre-print of Kovács et al., our group
           published a pre-print24 with four relevant findings that we confirm and further develop
           in the present study towards the definition of network shape intelligence: (i) a
           mathematical proof that L3 (renamed RA-L3) formula is the path-length 3
           generalization of a well-known path-length 2 modelling principle in network science
           (specifically in link prediction) which takes the name of resource allocation (RA) and
           was proposed in 2009 by Tao Zhou et al.25; (ii) the proposal of a general theoretical
           framework for designing local topological measures based on path-length n, where n
           indicate an arbitrary length; (iii) the definition of the Cannistraci resource allocation in
           path-length n (CRA-Ln renamed CH1-Ln) and the proposal of the general theory of
           Cannistraci-Hebb (CH) network automata with a new measure termed CH2-Ln24 (and
           CH3-Ln26 that we proposed in a subsequent version of the pre-print); (iv) computational
           evidence that CH1-L3, CH2-L3 and CH3-L326 significantly outperform L3 on protein
           interaction networks because they do not minimize interactions between proteins in
           local communities (Fig.1b). This last finding, since the appearance in our preprints24,26,
           has been confirmed with tests on hundreds of networks in two comparative surveys27,28.
           Here, we define, validate and compare (in 15 different types of protein interactomes)
           the Cannistraci-Hebb network automata theory versus L316. Based on these results, we
           propose the definition of what we name: network shape intelligence, which is the
           intelligence displayed by any topological network automata to perform valid
           (significantly more than uniformly random) connectivity predictions without training,
           but only processing the input knowledge associated to the local topological network
           organization. Then, we propose a computational framework to compare the
           performance and understand the differences between the power of cutting-edge AF deep
           learning intelligence and network shape intelligence. This allows us to define a positive
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           and negative set respectively composed by true and false protein interactions, which are
           used to validate the performance of the protein interaction computational predictions
           without the need to have at hand knowledge of the native 3D interaction structure. We
           find that CH network automata models significantly outperform L3 method for
           prediction of protein interactions tested in 15 networks of different organisms. Then, on
           Yeast DIP29–31 network, we show that regardless of using path-length 2 or path-length
           3, CH models significantly outperform AFM and this result is confirmed by using two
           different performance evaluation measures. Finally, we show that the set of interactions
           that is wrongly predicted by AFM is composed by proteins with amino acids that on
           average present significantly higher likelihood to belong to intrinsically disordered
           regions (IDR).

           Principles and modelling
           From L3 to Resource allocation on paths of length n
           Kovács et al.16 disclosed a principle based on paths of length three (L3) for network-
           based prediction of protein interactions that overcomes any rival method based on paths
           of length two (L2). The L3 principle was motivated by both 3D-structural and
           evolutionary arguments related to protein interactions, and the mechanistic model
           (mathematical formula) for modelling the L3 principle in unweighted and undirected
           networks is:
                                                                                       1
                                               𝐿3(𝑢, 𝑣) =            ∑
                                                               𝑧1 ,𝑧2 ∈ 𝑙3(𝑢,𝑣)
                                                                                  √𝑑𝑧1 ∗ 𝑑𝑧2

           where: u and v are the two seed nodes of the candidate interaction; 𝑧1 and 𝑧2 are the
           two intermediate nodes on the considered path of length three l3(u,v); 𝑑𝑧1 and 𝑑𝑧2

           are the respective node degrees; and the summation is executed over all the paths of
           length three. Kovács et al. motivate the penalization for the degree of 𝑧1 and 𝑧2 as
           follows16: << We expect that node pairs connected by the highest number of L3 paths
           are most likely to be directly connected. However, high degree nodes (hubs) might
           induce multiple, unspecific shortcuts in the network, biasing the results. To cancel
           potential degree biases caused by intermediate hubs in the paths, we assign a degree-
           normalized L3 score to each node pair, u and v >>.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           L3 mathematical definition as a mechanistic model was proposed more as a matter of
           intuition than as derivation from current theoretical knowledge, and it misses any
           connection to already known generalized principles for modelling and prediction of
           network connectivity. De facto, this represents a conceptual limitation because it fails
           to contribute to the theoretical understanding of the universal mechanisms and
           modelling formalisms that are behind emergence of network connectivity regardless of
           the specific physical system and its scale.
           The first objective of this study is to understand the generalized mechanistic principle
           of complex network self-organization behind the mathematical formula introduced by
           Kovács et al.16 for modelling the L3 principle in unweighted and undirected networks.
           And the first important finding is surprisingly simple: the generalized principle behind
           the L3 formula proposed by Kovács et al.16 is already well-known in network science,
           in particular in link prediction, and is termed resource allocation (RA) by Tao Zhou et
           al.25. To prove it, we need a few simple mathematical steps. The basic formula of the
           RA model on a path of length two (which from here forward we will call RA-L2) is:
                                                                                        1
                                                    𝑅𝐴_𝐿2(𝑢, 𝑣) =             ∑
                                                                                        𝑑𝑧
                                                                          𝑧 ∈ 𝑙2(𝑢,𝑣)

           where: u and v are the two seed nodes of the candidate interaction; 𝑧 is the
           intermediate node on the considered path of length two l2(u,v); 𝑑𝑧 is the respective
           node degree; and the summation is executed over all the paths of length two.
           To generalize to paths of length n > 2, we need an operator that merges the single
           contributions of each weighted (in this case degree-penalized) intermediate node on the
           path of length n (common neighbour in the L2 case). If, without loss of generality, we
           use as merging operator the geometric mean (which is a choice for designing a robust
           estimator, since if only one intermediate node on the path has a low weight, then the
           whole path is penalized), we derive the following generalized formula for paths of
           length n:
                                                                                             1
                                  𝑅𝐴_𝐿𝑛(𝑢, 𝑣) =                  ∑                                      1
                                                         𝑧1 …𝑧𝑛−1 ∈ 𝑙𝑛(𝑢,𝑣) (𝑑𝑧
                                                                                   1
                                                                                     ∗ … ∗ 𝑑𝑧𝑛−1 )𝑛−1
           where: u and v are the two seed nodes of the candidate interaction; 𝑧1 … 𝑧𝑛−1 are the
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           intermediate nodes on the considered path of length n ln(u,v); 𝑑𝑧1 … 𝑑𝑧𝑛−1 are the

           respective node degrees; and the summation is executed over all the paths of length n.
           For paths of length n = 3, the general formula given above becomes clearly equal to L3,
           which indeed extends the resource allocation principle to paths of length three, therefore
           from here forward we will call L3 with the new name of RA-L3.

           Network shape intelligence and Cannistraci-Hebb network automata
           We define network shape intelligence, the intelligence displayed by any topological
           network automata26 to perform valid (significantly more than random) connectivity
           predictions without training, by only processing the input knowledge associated to the
           local topological network organization. The training is not necessary because the
           network automaton performs predictions extracting information from the network
           topology, which can be regarded as an associative memory trained directly from the
           connectivity dynamics of the complex system. In this section we guide the reader along
           the     logical       journey        that     evolves        the     local-community-paradigm                   (LCP)
           theory14,15,18,21,22,24,26,28 for link prediction (which is restricted to paths of length 2 or 3),
           towards the proposed Cannistraci-Hebb theory for modelling network connectivity by
           means of network automata on paths of length n, and ultimately towards the foundation
           of network shape intelligence. To implement this plan, we start by recalling the basic
           rationale behind the LCP theory, which will turn to be useful also to understand the
           reasons to introduce the Cannistraci-Hebb theory.
           In 1949, Donald Olding Hebb advanced a local learning rule in neuronal networks that
           can be summarized in the following: neurons that fire together wire together32. In
           practice, the Hebbian learning theory assumes that different engrams (memory traces)
           are memorized by the differing neurons’ cohorts that are co-activated within a given
           network. Yet, the concept of wiring together was not further specified, and could be
           interpreted in two different ways. The first interpretation is that the connectivity already
           present, between neurons that fire together, is reinforced; whereas the second
           interpretation is the emergence and formation of new connectivity between non-
           interacting neurons already embedded in an interacting cohort.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           In 2013 Cannistraci et al.15 noticed that, considering only the network topology, the
           second interpretation of the Hebbian learning could be formalized as a mere problem
           of topological link prediction in complex networks. The rationale is the following. The
           network topology plays a crucial role in isolating cohorts of neurons in functional local
           communities that allows the neurons to perform local processing. The local-community
           organization increases the likelihood that a cohort of neurons fires together because
           they are confined in the same local community, consequently also the likelihood that
           they will create new connections inside the community is increased by the mere
           structure of the network topology. This mechanism implements a type of local
           topological learning that Cannistraci et al.15 called epitopological learning.
           Epitopological learning occurs when cohorts of neurons tend to be preferentially co-
           activated, because they are topologically restricted in a local community, and they
           facilitate learning by forming new connections. Cannistraci et al.15 proposed that the
           identification of this form of learning in neuronal networks was only a special case,
           hence epitopological learning and the associated local-community-paradigm (LCP)
           were proposed as a theory for local learning, self-organization and link-growth valid in
           general for topological link prediction in any complex network with LCP architecture
           15
                . On the basis of these ideas, they proposed a new class of link predictors that
           demonstrated - also in following studies of other authors16,27,33–39 - to outperform many
           states of the art local-based link predictors both in brain connectomes and in other types
           of complex networks (such as social, biological, economical, etc.)15,18,21,22,24.
           Furthermore, LCP and epitopological learning can enhance our understanding of how
           local brain connectivity is able to process, learn and memorize perceptions such as
           chronic pain 40. In conclusion, LCP originated from the initial idea to explain how the
           network topology indirectly influences the process of learning a memory by adding new
           connections in a network of neurons, and consequently it was generalized to advocate
           mechanistic modelling of topological growth and self-organization in real complex
           networks. How can this theory be exploited also in the domain of prediction of protein
           interactions?
           Protein interactomes display a clear LCP architecture14,15, where protein complexes are
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           confined in local and topologically isolated network structures, which are often
           coincident with functional network modules that play a crucial role in molecular circuits.
           The key generalized idea behind the LCP network architecture is that, for instance, a
           local community of neurons or proteins should take functional advantage of being
           confined in a local assembly of operational units. Each local assembly - if it is properly
           activated by an external signal coming from another region of the network - performs
           a functional operation by means of a structural remodelling of the internal connectivity
           (named iLCL in Fig. 1) between the operational units that are embedded in the network
           local community. The systems supported by LCP network architecture are very
           dynamic and react to a stimulus with a local plastic remodelling. In case of operational
           units such as neurons, the local-community remodelling can implement for instance a
           learning process. Instead, in case of operational units such as proteins, the local-
           community remodelling is necessary to implement for instance a biological process,
           which emerges by the molecular-complex rearrangement in the 3D space. The previous
           conceptual and mathematical formalizations of the LCP-theory were immature and put
           more emphasis on the fact that the information content related with the common
           neighbour nodes should be complemented with the topological information emerging
           from the interactions between them (the iLCL in Fig. 1). This represents a current
           limitation of the LCP theory that, by proposing the new concept of Cannistraci-Hebb
           rule, we want to overcome. Indeed, in 2018 Cannistraci14 showed that the local isolation
           of the operational units in the different local communities is equally important to carve
           the LCP architecture in the network, and this is guaranteed by the fact that the common
           neighbours minimize their interactions external (the eLCL in Fig. 1) to the local
           community14. The topological minimization forms a sort of physical and structural
           ‘energy barrier’, which in turn confines the signal processing to remain internally to the
           local community14. Hereafter, we will revise the LCP idea and its mathematical
           formalization to explicitly consider also the minimization of the external links (the
           eLCL in Fig. 1). The explicit rule that suggests the minimization of external links is
           named Cannistraci-Hebb (CH) rule19,24,26–28, and all the network automata models that
           implement in their mathematical formula the CH rule are belonging to the class of CH
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           network automata models19,21,24,26–28.
           CRA-L215 is the best performing rule in the framework of LCP theory, it represents the
           LCP extension of RA-L2, and it is a local-ring network automaton model21 that seems
           related and able to predict the growth of network topologies associated to hyperbolic
           geometry21. The starting point to revise the LCP theory is that empirical evidences
           provided by several studies16,27,33–39 in link prediction, and confirmed also by Kovács
           et al.16, show that CRA-L2 outperforms both RA-L2 and the large majority (Kovács et
           al. tested 23 methods) of other neighbourhood-based mechanistic and parameter-free
           L2-models. Hence, a fundamental question to address is what mechanisms make CRA-
           L2 so effective to outperform all the other local-based methods in -length 2 and, most
           importantly, whether also CRA-L3 would outperform RA-L3. For CRA-L2 network
           automaton model the likelihood of a new link to appear is function not only of the
           number of common neighbours, but also function of the numbers of iLCLs and eLCLs
           (Fig. 1). Therefore, the mathematical formula of CRA in L2 is:
                                                              𝑑𝑖𝑧                        𝑑𝑖𝑧                                  1
               𝐶𝑅𝐴𝐿2(𝑢,𝑣) = 𝐶𝐻1𝐿2(𝑢,𝑣) =           ∑              =      ∑                        →           ∑
                                                              𝑑𝑧                    2 + 𝑑𝑖𝑧 + 𝑑𝑒𝑧 𝑑𝑖𝑧 ≫2                 1 + 𝑑𝑒𝑧 /𝑑𝑖𝑧
                                                𝑧 ∈ 𝑙2(𝑢,𝑣)           𝑧 ∈ 𝑙2(𝑢,𝑣)                          𝑧 ∈ 𝑙2(𝑢,𝑣)

           where: u and v are the two seed nodes of the candidate interaction; 𝑧 is the
           intermediate node (common neighbour) on the considered path of length two l2(u,v);
           𝑑𝑧 is the respective node degree (which is equal to 2+#iLCLs+#eLCLs, where # stays
           for number); 𝑑𝑖𝑧 is the respective internal node degree (number of iLCL); and the
           summation is executed over all the paths of length two.
           However, observing this formula, it emerges that the principle behind CRA-L2 is not a
           resource allocation penalization. On the contrary, the model is based on the common
           neighbours’ rewards of the internal links (iLCL) balanced by the penalization of the
           external links. Hence, the current name is misleading. Since this model is a
           generalization and reinterpretation of a Hebbian learning local-rule to create new
           topology in networks proposed by Cannistraci (2018)14, we decide to rename CRA as
           L2-based Cannistraci-Hebb network automaton model number one (CH1-L2), rather
           than Cannistraci-Resource-Allocation (CRA), which was the name adopted in the
           previous articles. Yet, the formula of CH1-L2 is conceptually and mathematically
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           awkward. If we want to design a model that is based on the minimization of the eLCL
           and the maximization of the iLCL, why not to write it directly and explicitly? This is
           what we propose to realize with the definition of a model that we name CH2-L2 and
           that theoretically should be a straightforward mathematical formalization to express the
           principle or rule of topological self-organization behind the Cannistraci-Hebb network
           automaton modelling. The formula of CH2-L2 is:
                                                                                𝑑𝑖𝑧∗ 1 + 𝑑𝑖𝑧
                                        𝐶𝐻2_𝐿2(𝑢, 𝑣) =              ∑          ( ∗=          )
                                                                                𝑑𝑒𝑧 1 + 𝑑𝑒𝑧
                                                                 𝑧 ∈ 𝑙2(𝑢,𝑣)

           where: u and v are the two seed nodes of the candidate interaction; 𝑧 is the
           intermediate node (common neighbour) on the considered path of length two l2(u,v);
           𝑑𝑖𝑧 is the respective internal node degree (number of iLCL); 𝑑𝑒𝑧 is the respective
           external node degree (number of eLCL); and the summation is executed over all the
           paths of length two. Note that a unitary term is added to the numerator and denominator
           to avoid the saturation of the value in case of iLCL or eLCL equal to zero.
           To confirm the importance of the isolation of the local communities14, we propose CH3-
           L2, which is a third network automata model that implements exclusively the CH rule,
           hence its mathematical formula relies on the solely minimization of 𝑑𝑒𝑧 which is the
           number of eLCLs for each common neighbour 𝑧 on l2(u,v) paths:
                                                                                    1     1
                                        𝐶𝐻3_𝐿2(𝑢, 𝑣) =              ∑          (      ∗
                                                                                        =      )
                                                                                   𝑑𝑒𝑧 1 + 𝑑𝑒𝑧
                                                                 𝑧 ∈ 𝑙2(𝑢,𝑣)

           Fig. 1 suggests an interpretation about how the CH network automata models work in
           a monopartite topology. The ensemble of paths of a given length n creates a local-tunnel
           which provides a route of connectivity between the two nonadjacent nodes. The higher
           the number of common neighbours, the higher the size of the local-tunnel. For each
           common neighbour, the lower the number of eLCLs, the more the shape of the local-
           tunnel is well-defined and its existence confirmed. Therefore, in link prediction, CH
           models estimate a likelihood that is proportional both to the size of the local-tunnel
           (which is associated to the number of common neighbours) and to the extent to which
           the local-tunnel exists (which is associated to the minimization of external links). In
           contrast, the classical common neighbour network automaton model only estimates a
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           likelihood proportional to the size of the local-tunnel, which is a significant limitation.
           Furthermore, the local community represents the central chunk of the local-tunnel
           exclusively formed by CNs and iLCLs. The local community represents a bridging
           structure which is fundamental to transfer the information between the two seed nodes.
           While eLCLs minimization is a necessary condition for the existence of the local-tunnel,
           the maximization of iLCLs might not play always an important role in all complex
           systems, and the next section on the experimental evidences will help to shed light on
           this diversity of the two mechanisms. As a sanity check, Suppl. Table 1 reports the
           formula of a network automaton that implements the exclusive maximization of iLCLs.
           The final step in our journey towards the complete definition of CH network automata
           is the generalization in Ln. In Suppl. Note 1 and Supp. Table 1, we explain the steps for
           this generalization and in Fig. 1 we provide the mathematical formula of the CH rules
           in path-length n.
           To summarize, in this study we compare four CH network automata models (RA-Ln,
           CH1-Ln, CH2-Ln and CH3-Ln) and one not-CH network automaton model (iLCL-Ln)
           considering path-length 2 and 3. All of these models are based on the definition of local
           community, but the CH models are the ones that as a necessary condition implement
           eLCLs minimization, hence note that RA-Ln is also a CH model. As a final remark, we
           will not consider other similarity measures that are not-CH, such as the many already
           considered in Kovács et al16, because they were already shown to be outperformed by
           RA-L3. At last, we clarify that the CH model is endowed of a sub-ranking strategy to
           internally sub-rank all the nonadjacent node pairs characterized by the same CH score.
           The effect of this sub-ranking strategy is twofold and is discussed in Suppl. Note 1. All
           the network predictors tested in results section are fairly evaluated considering their
           adjustment with the sub-ranking strategy.


           Experimental evidences
           Comparing predictions of network shape intelligence methods
           Our experiments are based on 10% random removal and re-prediction of the original
           protein network topology, repeated for 10 realizations: mean and standard error values
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           of performance indicators are considered for the evaluation. This is the standard
           procedure to test link prediction when - as in protein interactomes - only positive set
           (observed links in the network) and missing set (the union of negative and undetected
           positive links) are available14-19,21–28,41. Indeed, as we show in Suppl. Fig. 1, the removal
           of 50% of the original links brings to a significant aberration of the network features,
           whereas for 10% removal the aberration is negligible. Each predictor assigns a
           likelihood to the missing links, which are then ranked, and the performance is evaluated
           using AUP@10016,24 which focuses on the precision in the first part (first 100 predicted
           interactions) of the ranking, AUC-mROC28,42 and AUC-PR43,44 which are threshold-
           free measures for unbalanced sets. Indeed, in unbalanced sets, the evaluation purpose
           is to assess the prediction of few positives in contrast to a large majority of undefined
           samples, and to assess the extent to which true links are prioritized in all the ranking
           list28,42.
           The second important finding of this study (obtained by testing predictions on 15
           protein networks) is that CH2-L3 and CH3-L3 models perform significantly better than
           RA-L3 (Fig. 2, Suppl. Fig. 3,4 and Suppl. Table 2-4), and similarly CH2-L2 and CH3-
           L2 perform better than RA-L2 (Suppl. Table 2-4). This implies that in general
           (regardless of L3 or L2 implementation of the model) for protein networks the RA
           penalization, which was the original principle of self-organization behind the L3 model
           proposed by Kovács et al., might not be the most appropriate because it minimizes not
           only the eLCLs (reason for which is a CH model) but also the iLCLs. Hence, in protein
           interactions, a correct mechanism of prediction might be: i) to adopt L3 paths (as
           previously discovered by Kovács et al.16); ii) to minimize eLCLs (as shown in this study
           and supported in a previous study of Cannistraci (2018)14); iii) to non-minimize iLCLs
           (as shown in this study and supported in a previous study of Cannistraci (2018)14).
           Indeed, the solely minimization of eLCLs implemented by CH3-L3 seems enough to
           predict protein interactions using local information, because the iLCL maximization of
           CH1-L3 and CH2-L3 does not seem to offer significant improvement (Fig. 2, Suppl.
           Fig. 2-4 and Suppl. Table 2-4). In addition, CH2-L3 and CH3-L3 perform better than
           CH1-L3 (Suppl. Tables 2-4), and this result indicates that our intuition to design CH2-
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           L3 and CH3-L3, which are more straightforward mathematical formulae for the CH
           principle, was well-posed.


           Network shape intelligence outperforms AlphaFold2 intelligence in PPI prediction
           Since nothing can be concluded about the missing interactions (they are a mix of true
           and false interactions), the evaluation adopted in the previous section focuses on
           measuring the extent to which randomly removed positive interactions are prioritized
           on top of the ranking, because their predicted likelihood is larger than the other missing
           interactions. However, this procedure is partial, because does not account for the ability
           of a predictor to put at the bottom of the ranking the interactions that are false (negative).
           In addition, protein interaction networks have false positive links14,45, therefore to
           evaluate the performance of a predictor we must make sure that the tested positive and
           negative interactions are reliable. Here, we introduce a computational framework in
           protein interaction prediction evaluation that tries to overcome these limitations, and
           we employ it to compare the performance and understand the differences between the
           power of cutting-edge AF deep learning intelligence and network shape intelligence.
           Considering the high computational time of AFM for predicting a protein interaction
           pair, we could focus only on the network of a single organism. Without loss of
           generality and to ensure that the golden standard of tested interactions is of the highest
           reliability, we focus on the yeast DIP protein interactome (S. Cerevisiae, DIP
           database29–31, 4951 proteins and 22382 interactions) which is a valuable resource in the
           field of computational biology, because yeast is one of the most studied organisms 46,47
           and its interactome is one of the most extensively characterized experimentally11,48. We
           propose a bona fide evaluation methodology (BFEM) that can assess the performance
           in predicting protein interactions using as benchmark the network of any well studied
           organism such as S. Cerevisiae, from which a golden standard of true and false
           interactions is generated. The positive set is composed by all existing protein
           interactions. The golden standard positive (GSP) set is composed by the top 20%
           positive interactions with the highest value of a gene ontology (GO) semantic measure
           designed and adopted by Cannistraci (2018) in a previous study on protein interaction
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           reliability14. The negative set is composed by selecting an amount of missing
           interactions that equals the number of existing interactions in the positive set, and with
           the lowest value of a GO semantic measure designed in this study for this purpose (see
           Methods). The golden standard negative (GSN) set is composed by the bottom 20%
           negative interactions with the lowest value of the same GO semantic measure. BFEM
           applied on the yeast protein network produces a balanced classification scenario with
           golden standard positive (GSP = 4476) and negative (GSN = 4476) sets. The GSP
           interactions can be randomly sampled and removed from the network for re-prediction
           by CH methods; whereas the GSN are not in the network hence, after removal of the
           GSP, can be directly predicted by CH methods. Contrary to the case of unbalanced
           prediction scenario discussed in the previous section, here the standard AUC-ROC can
           be used as performance evaluation measure, together with AUC-PR.
           At first, to define the interactions to predict, we consider a BFEM in which we sample
           uniformly at random 10% positive (2238) and 10% negative (2238) interactions,
           respectively from the GSP and the GSN (therefore 50% of the GSP and GSN sets). We
           indicate this BFEM setup as 10%GSP+10%GSN. This procedure is repeated for 10
           realizations and the mean prediction performance of the best CH methods (CH2 and
           CH3 according to the results in previous section) and AFM (AFM-IS and AFM-piTMS6)
           is evaluated. We find that CH3-L3 and CH2-L3 remarkably outperform (Fig. 3, about
           40% improvement according to AUC-ROC and 30% improvement according to AUC-
           PR) AFM-IS and AFM-piTMS, which is the third important finding of our study. The
           results are confirmed, with even a small improvement of CH methods, if we repeat the
           analysis considering random 5% positive (1119) and 5% negative (1119) interactions
           (5%GSP+5%GSN in Suppl. Fig. 5), respectively from the GSP and the GSN.
           Remarkably, CH3-L3/CH2-L3 outperform AFM-IS/AFM-piTMS of about 70%
           improvement for AUC-ROC and 60% improvement for AUC-PR when we adopt an
           evaluation methodology predicting 1% positive (224) and 1% negative (224)
           interactions (1%positive+1%negative in Suppl. Fig. 6), which are uniformly sampled
           at random from the entire positive set (all the 22382 observed interactions in the yeast
           network) and the entire negative set (22382 nonobserved interactions with the lowest
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           GO-based semantic measure proposed in this study).
           The fourth important finding is that also in this BFEM evaluation framework the results
           are consistent with the ones provided in the previous section, indeed L3 methods
           performs better than L2 (Fig. 3, Suppl. Fig. 5-6). The fact that we provide BFEM as an
           effective GO-based evaluation framework is relevant because Kovács et al. reached
           contradictory results using a previously established GO-based framework12,16. Indeed,
           in Kovács et al., mere network topology prediction evaluation and GO evaluation
           disagree on what is the best strategy, with L2 methods performing better than L316 in
           GO evaluation. Kovács et al. reported that the legitimacy of using GO terms or
           functional annotations to evaluate the quality of the predicted physical interactions
           should be questioned because they are based on similarity measures that are biased for
           L2. We show that BFEM does not suffer of this issue because, as demonstrated by
           Cannistraci (2018)14, we apply a more elaborated and stringent GO-filtered evaluation
           framework, which limits the analysis to the intersection of biological process (BP) and
           cellular component (CC) categories, as they provide more context and information
           about the protein interaction role within the cell. Indeed, proteins that do not participate
           to similar biological processes inside the same cellular compartments have less
           probability to interact. Furthermore, applying BFEM to a well-studied organism such
           as the yeast improves the quality and reliability of our results, to the point that we trust
           to investigate more in depth what are the reasons of the lower performance prediction
           of AFM.
           We show that the set of interactions wrongly predicted by AFM is composed by proteins
           with amino acids that on average present significantly higher likelihood to belong to
           intrinsically disordered regions (IDR), and this is the fifth important finding. To this
           aim we introduce the interaction disorder index (IDI) which is a measure to quantify
           the presence of intrinsically disordered regions that affect the proteins involved in an
           interaction (see methods for details). Fig. 4a,c compare the distributions of IDI for true
           positive and false negative predictions in the entire GSP set (4476 interactions)
           considering AFM predictors, and report a significant difference (p-values are obtained
           applying a permutation test comparing the median of the data in the two groups). Fig.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           4b,d report for AFM predictors a significant difference between the IDI distributions of
           true negative and false positive predictions in the entire GSN set (4476 interactions).
           This means that when AFM prediction is wrong most likely this is associated to the fact
           that the 3D structure of the proteins involved in the interactions is populated by IDR.
           The fact that AF has issues to predict the 3D structure of proteins with unstructured or
           intrinsically disordered regions is discussed in previous studies1,49, but our study is the
           first to propose a method to evaluate the extent to which this issue impacts also the
           prediction of protein interaction pairs. When we perform the same test for CH3-L3
           (which is the best performing CH method), we notice (Fig.4 e,f) that all p-values are
           not significant and this implies that the prediction error (which is very low, see Fig. 3)
           of CH3-L3 is not associated with IDR. Finally, Fig.4 g,h report the remarkable
           computational time advantage of network shape intelligence (CH3-L3) over AFM
           prediction.

           Discussion
           Starting from our seminal studies on path-length 3 in bipartite networks18, passing
           through the L3 model by Kovács et al.16, in this study we show that L3 mathematical
           formula can emerge as part of a general theory for network automata modelling that
           through the lens of the Cannistraci-Hebb rule can produce results more astonishing than
           L3 itself for prediction of protein interactions. These results are confirmed in general
           complex network connectivity across different physical scales24.
           The network automaton is a process that accesses to the local topology T(s) at state s
           and uses this topological memory trace (engram) to predict the next local connectivity
           T(s+1)21. Since the network represents a discrete memory of the state at time t of a
           complex dynamic systems whose rule of association between its generative latent
           variable is a manifold in a geometrical space45,50–52, the network automaton does not
           need training, because it reads directly from the network topology the knowledge that
           is necessary to decide how to evolve the connectivity at the next step.
           Network shape intelligence methods such as Cannistraci-Hebb network automata for
           modelling and predicting network connectivity, using only local network information
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           and without training, can outperform AlphaFold2 intelligence in protein interactions
           prediction, with a substantial advantage also in computational time. These results are
           gained by employing a bona fide evaluation methodology (BFEM) for assessment of
           protein interaction predictions, and the set of protein interactions mispredicted by
           AlphaFold2 contains amino acids that on average present significantly higher
           likelihood to belong to intrinsically disordered regions. To this aim we introduce the
           IDI which is a measure to quantify the presence of intrinsically disordered regions that
           affect the proteins involved in a single pairwise interaction however, as we comment in
           the method section, IDI can be extended to quantify the presence of intrinsically
           disordered regions in protein complexes. To advance modelling and prediction of
           protein interactions, next generation AlphaFold intelligence might integrate principles
           of network shape intelligence.


           Methods
           Dataset of protein-protein interactions.
           We evaluated our findings using 15 diverse interactomes spanning seven different
           species, as utilized by Kovács et al16. Additionally, we incorporated the Yeast DIP29–31
           network to specifically compare the Network Shape Intelligence-based methods with
           the AlphaFold2 Intelligence approach. In Suppl. Tables 5-7, we report the main
           topological features and the sources with references to the associated studies of these
           networks.
           The 15 interactomes include the following types. Systematic networks generated by a
           binary pipeline, such as the Human (HI-II-14), Yeast (Y2H-Union), and Arabidopsis
           (AI) interactomes. Literature-curated PPI networks of direct physical interactions, such
           as Lit-BM-13 and the BioGRID. From BioGRID interactome, we considered "direct
           interactions" and proteins assigned to the correct "taxid" corresponding to the studied
           species. Co-complex proteomic datasets, such as the Bioplex and Hein et al. AP-MS
           datasets. The Interactome3D dataset, which provides a summary of currently available
           interactions with structural evidence. For the Yeast DIP network, we obtained the list
           of PPIs (version Scere20170205) as pairs of Uniprot IDs and the corresponding FASTA
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           sequences of the proteins (version DIP_20171201) from the Database of Interacting
           Proteins (DIP): https://dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu/dip/Main.cgi. Once again, we specifically
           considered "direct interactions" and proteins assigned to the correct "taxid"
           corresponding to the yeast species.
           Each PPI network was constructed and transformed into an undirected, unweighted
           format without self-loops, and only the largest connected component was retained.


           Construction of protein sets for the bona fide evaluation methodology (BFEM).
           Applying a procedure adopted in previous studies14,15 , the Wang Gene Ontology (GO)
           semantic similarity53 was computed for all protein pairs (existing and missing) in the
           Yeast DIP network, using the R package GOSemSim54. This method measures the
           similarity between GO terms and assigns a similarity score between 0 and 1 for each
           GO domain: biological process (BP), cellular component (CC) and molecular function
           (MF). Conversion from Uniprot IDs to Entrez IDs was performed with the Gene ID
           Conversion Tool of DAVID55,56, as the GOSemSim function requires a list of Entrez
           IDs as input.
           To define the golden standard positive (GSP) set, we applied an elaborated and stringent
           GO-based framework as demonstrated by Cannistraci (2018)14, and limited our analysis
           to the biological process (BP) and cellular component (CC) categories as they provide
           more context and information about the protein's role within the cell. This GO measure
           is based on the stringent criteria according to which two interacting proteins should
           share similar biological processes and be identified in similar cellular compartments14.
           Using Cannistraci’s GO similarity method, a GO similarity matrix with the minimum
           value between BP and CC for all existing protein interactions is created. Then, we sort
           these interactions by decreasing min(BP,CC) value, the higher the value the more at the
           top of the ranking. The rationale is that the most reliable interactions are the ones that
           rank at the top of the list even in the most conservative scenario in which the minimum
           value between BP and CC is considered. The positive set is composed by all the existing
           interactions (22382), and the golden standard positive (GSP) set is composed by the top
           20% interactions (4476) in this ranking that were successfully predicted by AFM. To
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           define the negative set, we introduce a new GO similarity measure according to which
           a GO similarity matrix with the maximum value between BP and CC for all missing
           interactions is created. Then, we sort these missing interactions by decreasing
           max(BP,CC) value, the lower the value the more at the bottom of the ranking. The
           rationale is that the less reliable interactions are the ones that rank at the bottom of the
           list even in the most relaxed scenario in which the maximum value between BP and CC
           is considered. The negative set is composed by selecting an amount of missing
           interactions at the bottom of this ranking that equals the number of existing interactions
           in the positive set (22382). The golden standard negative (GSN) set is composed by the
           bottom 20% interactions (4476) in this ranking that were successfully predicted by
           AFM. Please note that the final GO similarity matrix was smaller in size compared to
           the original adjacency matrix and its number of proteins and interactions is 4,672 and
           21,816 respectively. This is due to reasons such as the failure to convert Uniprot IDs to
           Entrez IDs, or some proteins not having any annotations.


           AlphaFold2-Multimer (AFM) prediction of protein-protein interactions.
           In order to perform simulations in a reasonable amount of time, we used AFM-based
           ColabFold interface57 to model protein-protein interactions. Specifically, we utilized
           LocalColabFold (v1.3.0), an installer script that makes ColabFold functionality
           available on local machines, which speeds up single predictions by replacing AFM's
           homology                   search                with               the              faster               MMseqs2:
           https://github.com/YoshitakaMo/localcolabfold. ColabFold was provided with multi-
           sequence FASTA files in input and executed with template mode on and number of
           recycles of 3 (default setting). The relaxation option was disabled as it was shown that
           AF2’s relaxation does not improve the accuracy of the predicted model1.
           To predict heterodimeric protein complexes, we configured and tested six different
           settings using different combinations of the pair-mode (“unpaired+paired", "unpaired",
           "paired") and the model-type ("AlphaFold2-multimer-v1", "AlphaFold2-multimer-v2").
           This resulted in six outputs for each prediction. We also modified ColabFold interface
           to include two metrics for estimating the confidence of a predicted complex as
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           introduced by Gao et al.6: the predicted interface TM-score (AFM-piTMS) and the
           interface score (AFM-IS). Each predicted protein pair returned five (default) unrelaxed
           predicted structures in PDB format text file, a JSON format text file containing the
           times taken to run each section of the AFM pipeline, and another file collecting the
           AFM-based measures for each unrelaxed predicted structure.
           The results of the comparison between the 6 settings are displayed in Suppl Fig. 7, and
           the setting that offered the best performance in the classification of the golden standard
           positive (GSP) and the golden standard negative (GSN) protein pairs of the Yeast DIP
           network is ‘unpaired+paired’, therefore it was used to compare the performance with
           the Network Shape Intelligence methods in the Fig. 3,4 and Suppl. Fig. 5,6 of this study.
           In this study, for a fair comparison with the network shape intelligence methods, we
           decided to adopt Gao et al.6 method because, unlike Evans' piTM score3 (named ipTM
           score in their paper), Gao's piTM score has an adjusted normalization factor in the
           formula to better deal with the cases where a low number of contacts at the interface
           are observed. Besides, Gao et al. interface score (IS) is similar to Evans' ipTM score,
           however the IS has the advantage to be calculated for each protein chain separately by
           considering the observed number of interface residues in that chain. The optimal local
           reference for calculating the score for a specific chain is selected using interface
           residues that do not belong to that chain. Gao et al. approach allows for a more targeted
           analysis of interface residues (versus full chain in Evans et al.), which is particularly
           relevant for protein interaction predictions, which is the focus of this study. Besides,
           we preferred to adopt Gao et al.6 method instead of Bryant et al.5 method (predicted
           DockQ score: pDockQ) because Gao et al. scoring methods (piTM score and interface
           score IS) are specifically designed to evaluate protein-protein interactions and provide
           a comprehensive analysis of interface residues. On the other hand, Bryant et al. method
           (pDockQ) focuses on estimating the overall quality of the predicted model rather than
           quantifying the quality of each individual interface within a multi-chain complex. One
           advantage of Gao et al.'s piTM score over pDockQ is that it incorporates an adjusted
           normalization factor in its formula. As we explained above, this factor accounts for
           situations where a low number of contacts at the interface are observed. By considering
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           this normalization factor, Gao et al.'s piTM score provides a more accurate assessment
           of the interface quality, particularly in cases where the number of interface residues is
           limited. In contrast, pDockQ does not have such a normalization factor, which may lead
           to biased evaluations in scenarios with few interface contacts. Moreover, the IS of Gao
           et al. is similar to Bryant et al. pDockQ in that they both evaluate the quality of the
           interface. However, IS offers the advantage of calculating the score for each protein
           chain separately. This individual assessment of each chain's interface allows for a more
           targeted analysis of the interface residues, taking into account the observed number of
           residues specific to each chain. Gao et al. achieve this by selecting the optimal local
           reference using interface residues that do not belong to the chain being evaluated. In
           contrast, Bryant et al. pDockQ does not provide a chain-specific analysis and evaluates
           the overall interface quality without considering the contributions of individual chains.
           Therefore, based on the adjusted normalization factor incorporated in Gao et al. piTM
           score and the chain-specific evaluation provided by Gao et al. IS, we have opted to
           employ Gao et al. scoring methods over Bryant et al. pDockQ for our research work,
           as they align more closely with our specific goals and requirements in the analysis of
           protein-protein interactions within multi-chain complexes.


           Cannistraci-Hebb network automata
           The Cannistraci-Hebb (CH) theory21,24,26,28 has been introduced as a revision of the
           local-community paradigm (LCP) theory14,15,18,22 and it has been formalized within the
           framework of network automata21,24,26,28. While the LCP paradigm emphasized the
           importance to complement the information related to the common neighbours with the
           interactions between them (internal local-community-links), the CH rule is based on
           the local isolation of the common neighbours by minimizing their interactions external
           to the local community (external local-community links). CH network automata on
           paths of length n are all the network automata models that explicitly consider the
           minimization of the external local community-links within a local community
           characterized by paths of length n26. We considered the following CH models: CH1-
           L2/L3, CH2-L2/L3, CH3-L2/L3; also RA-L2/L3 is considered a CH model because its
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           definition relies on the minimization of external links in the local community. In
           addition, each of the four CH models applied the associated CH-SPcorr score for
           subranking26, in order to internally sub-rank all the node pairs characterized by the same
           CH score, reducing the ranking uncertainty of node pairs that are tied-ranked. The code
           to run these methods is available at the web address provided in the code availability
           section of the study.

           Interaction disorder index (IDI)
           The interaction disorder index (IDI) is a measure that we introduce to quantify the
           extent to which intrinsically disordered regions occur and affect the proteins involved
           in an interaction. The procedure to compute the IDI is the following. We employ the
           IUPred3 algorithm58 : a widely used computational tool that predicts the likelihood of
           each amino acid in a protein sequence being in a disordered region. IUPred3 is applied
           to the amino acids of each protein within an interaction pair, and the mean of amino
           acid IUPred3 scores for protein 1 and protein 2 are computed, for instance S1 is the
           mean of the scores for protein 1 and S2 for protein 2 respectively. To calculate the value
           of interaction disorder index for a protein interaction, we take the average of S1 and S2:
           (𝑆1 + 𝑆2 )
                    . To calculate the value of interaction disorder index for a protein complex, or
               2

           for an ensemble of interactions in a network, we suggest adopting a centrality measure
           (for instance, the mean or median) of the probability distribution formed by the IDIs
           values of the interactions in the complex or in the interaction ensemble.
           In Figure 4, the p-values for each panel are obtained applying a permutation test
           comparing the median (we prefer the median to the mean because the distributions are
           skewed) of the data in the two groups. The probability density functions are plotted
           using a kernel smoothing function (ksdensity in MATLAB) with a bandwidth value of
           0.3 because this bandwidth value offers a distributions shape that reflects the statistics
           of the data obtained by the permutation test.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           Time computation of CHA and AFM on the Yeast DIP network.
           To determine the average computation time of CH for predicting one interaction, we
           annotated the time required for CH to predict all the node pairs and divided by the total
           number of pairs. For AFM we annotated the time to predict a random sample of 1%
           PPIs and divided that by the total number of predicted interactions. To determine the
           computational time of CH or AFM for predicting all missing interactions, we multiplied
           the average prediction time of one interaction for all the missing interactions. Note that
           the CH algorithm was executed in parallel using 12 workers on a local workstation
           (Hardware and software section), while AFM simulations were launched on the multi-
           GPU cluster at the Center for Information Services and High-Performance Computing
           (ZIH) of TU Dresden (see below Hardware and software section).


           Hardware and software
           The CH network automata computation were executed in a workstation under Windows
           10 Enterprise 2016 LTSB with 176 GB RAM, and 2 Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU X5550
           processors (4 cores each) with 2.67 GHz. The software environment is MATLAB
           2019a.
           The AFM simulations were executed on the multi-GPU cluster "Alpha Centauri" at the
           ZIH of the TU Dresden. It has 34 nodes, each with:
                •    8 x NVIDIA A100-SXM4 (40 GB RAM)
                •    2 x AMD EPYC 7352 CPU (24 cores) with 2.3 GHz with multi-threading
                     enabled
                •    1 TB RAM
           One GPU and eight CPU cores were used to run AFM properly. The loaded modules
           environment in the cluster are GCC/10.2.0, CUDA/11.3.1, OpenMPI/4.0.5. The
           software environment is Python 3.9.


           Data availability
           The networks to reproduce the result of this study are provide at the GitHub repository:
           https://github.com/biomedical-cybernetics/NSIforPPI [they will be released after
           article acceptance].
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           Code Availability
           The MATLAB codes to compute CH network automata and to reproduce the results of
           some main figures of the study are publicly available at the GitHub repository:
           https://github.com/biomedical-cybernetics/NSIforPPI [they will be released after
           article acceptance].

           References

           1.       Jumper, J. et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 596, 583–
                    589 (2021).
           2.       Lin, Z. et al. Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level protein structure with a language
                    model. Science (80-. ). 379, 1123–1130 (2023).
           3.       Evans,     R.    et   al.   Protein     complex      prediction     with AlphaFold-Multimer.            (2022)
                    doi:10.1101/2021.10.04.463034.
           4.       Baek, M. et al. Accurate prediction of protein structures and interactions using a three-track
                    neural network. Science (80-. ). (2021) doi:10.1126/science.abj8754.
           5.       Bryant, P., Pozzati, G. & Elofsson, A. Improved prediction of protein-protein interactions using
                    AlphaFold2. Nat. Commun. (2022) doi:10.1038/s41467-022-28865-w.
           6.       Gao, M., Nakajima An, D., Parks, J. M. & Skolnick, J. AF2Complex predicts direct physical
                    interactions in multimeric proteins with deep learning. Nat. Commun. 13, 1744 (2022).
           7.       Burke, D. F. et al. Towards a structurally resolved human protein interaction network. Nat. Struct.
                    Mol. Biol. (2023) doi:10.1038/s41594-022-00910-8.
           8.       Roney, J. P. & Ovchinnikov, S. State-of-the-Art Estimation of Protein Model Accuracy Using
                    AlphaFold. Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, 238101 (2022).
           9.       Rolland, T. et al. A proteome-scale map of the human interactome network. Cell 159, 1212–1226
                    (2014).
           10.      Luck, K. et al. A reference map of the human binary protein interactome. Nature 580, 402–408
                    (2020).
           11.      H., Y. et al. High-quality binary protein interaction map of the yeast interactome network. Science
                    (80-. ). 322, 104–110 (2008).
           12.      Menche, J. et al. Uncovering disease-disease relationships through the incomplete interactome.
                    Science (80-. ). 347, 841 (2015).
           13.      Ideker, T. et al. Integrated genomic and proteomic analyses of a systematically perturbed
                    metabolic network. Science (80-. ). (2001) doi:10.1126/science.292.5518.929.
           14.      Cannistraci, C. V. Modelling Self-Organization in Complex Networks Via a Brain-Inspired
                    Network Automata Theory Improves Link Reliability in Protein Interactomes. Sci. Rep. 8, 15760
                    (2018).
           15.      Cannistraci, C. V., Alanis-Lobato, G. & Ravasi, T. From link-prediction in brain connectomes
                    and protein interactomes to the local-community-paradigm in complex networks. Sci. Rep. (2013)
                    doi:10.1038/srep01613.
           16.      Kovács, I. A. et al. Network-based prediction of protein interactions. Nat. Commun. 10, 1–8
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




                    (2019).
           17.      Wang, X.-W. et al. Assessment of community efforts to advance network-based prediction of
                    protein–protein interactions. Nat. Commun. 14, 1582 (2023).
           18.      Daminelli, S., Thomas, J. M., Durán, C. & Vittorio Cannistraci, C. Common neighbours and the
                    local-community-paradigm for topological link prediction in bipartite networks. New J. Phys.
                    (2015) doi:10.1088/1367-2630/17/11/113037.
           19.      Zhou,      T.    Progresses       and     challenges        in      link     prediction.   iScience     (2021)
                    doi:10.1016/j.isci.2021.103217.
           20.      Zhou, T., Ren, J., Medo, M. & Zhang, Y. C. Bipartite network projection and personal
                    recommendation.         Phys.    Rev.     E    -   Stat.        Nonlinear,    Soft   Matter   Phys.     (2007)
                    doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.76.046115.
           21.      Muscoloni, A., Michieli, U. & Cannistraci, C. V. Local-ring network automata and the impact of
                    hyperbolic geometry in complex network link-prediction Brain bio-inspired computation (BBC)
                    lab. doi:doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1707.09496.
           22.      Durán, C. et al. Pioneering topological methods for network-based drug–target prediction by
                    exploiting a brain-network self-organization theory. Brief. Bioinform. 19, 1183–1202 (2018).
           23.      Kovács, I. A. et al. Network-based prediction of protein interactions. bioRxiv (2018).
           24.      Muscoloni, A., Abdelhamid, I. & Cannistraci, C. V. Local-community network automata
                    modelling based on length-three-paths for prediction of complex network structures in protein
                    interactomes, food webs and more. doi:10.1101/346916.
           25.      Zhou, T., Lu, L. & Zhang, Y. C. Predicting missing links via local information. Eur. Phys. J. B
                    71, 623–630 (2009).
           26.      Muscoloni, A., Michieli, U., Zhang, Y. & Cannistraci, C. V. Adaptive Network Automata
                    Modelling of Complex Networks. (2022) doi:10.20944/preprints202012.0808.v3.
           27.      Zhou, T., Lee, Y. L. & Wang, G. Experimental analyses on 2-hop-based and 3-hop-based link
                    prediction algorithms. Phys. A Stat. Mech. its Appl. (2021) doi:10.1016/j.physa.2020.125532.
           28.      Muscoloni, A. & Cannistraci, C. V. “Stealing fire or stacking knowledge” by machine
                    intelligence     to    model     link    prediction        in     complex      networks.   iScience     (2023)
                    doi:10.1016/j.isci.2022.105697.
           29.      Xenarios, I. et al. DIP, the Database of Interacting Proteins: A research tool for studying cellular
                    networks of protein interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. (2002) doi:10.1093/nar/30.1.303.
           30.      Xenarios, I. et al. DIP: The Databases of Interacting Protein: 2001 update. Nucleic Acids Res.
                    (2001) doi:10.1093/nar/29.1.239.
           31.      Salwinski, L. et al. The Database of Interacting Proteins: 2004 update. Nucleic Acids Res. (2004)
                    doi:10.1093/nar/gkh086.
           32.      Hebb, D. O. The Organization of Behavior. New York: Wiley vol. 911 (1949).
           33.      Liu, Z., He, J. L., Kapoor, K. & Srivastava, J. Correlations between Community Structure and
                    Link Formation in Complex Networks. PLoS One 8, (2013).
           34.      Pan, L., Zhou, T., Lü, L. & Hu, C.-K. Predicting missing links and identifying spurious links via
                    likelihood analysis. Sci. Rep. 6, 1–10 (2016).
           35.      Tan, F., Xia, Y. & Zhu, B. Link prediction in complex networks: A mutual information
                    perspective. PLoS One 9, (2014).
           36.      Wang, W., Cai, F., Jiao, P. & Pan, L. A perturbation-based framework for link prediction via non-
                    negative matrix factorization. Sci. Rep. 6, 38938 (2016).
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           37.      Wang, T., Wang, H. & Wang, X. CD-Based indices for link prediction in complex network. PLoS
                    One 11, 5–7 (2016).
           38.      Pech, R., Hao, D., Pan, L., Cheng, H. & Zhou, T. Link Prediction via Matrix Completion. EPL
                    38002 (2017) doi:10.1209/0295-5075/117/38002.
           39.      Shakibian, H. & Charkari, N. M. Mutual information model for link prediction in heterogeneous
                    complex networks. Sci. Rep. 7, 44981 (2017).
           40.      Narula, V., Zippo, A. G., Muscoloni, A., Biella, G. E. M. & Cannistraci, C. V. Can local-
                    community-paradigm and epitopological learning enhance our understanding of how local brain
                    connectivity is able to process, learn and memorize chronic pain? Appl. Netw. Sci. 2, 28 (2017).
           41.      Lü, L., Pan, L., Zhou, T., Zhang, Y. C. & Stanley, H. E. Toward link predictability of complex
                    networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. (2015) doi:10.1073/pnas.1424644112.
           42.      Muscoloni, A. & Cannistraci, C. V. Early retrieval problem and link prediction evaluation via the
                    area under the magnified ROC. (Submitted) (2022) doi:10.20944/preprints202209.0277.v1.
           43.      Lichtenwalter, R. & Chawla, N. V. Link prediction: Fair and effective evaluation. in Proceedings
                    of the 2012 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and
                    Mining, ASONAM 2012 (2012). doi:10.1109/ASONAM.2012.68.
           44.      Yang, Y., Lichtenwalter, R. N. & Chawla, N. V. Evaluating link prediction methods. Knowl. Inf.
                    Syst. (2015) doi:10.1007/s10115-014-0789-0.
           45.      Cannistraci, C. V., Alanis-Lobato, G. & Ravasi, T. Minimum curvilinearity to enhance
                    topological prediction of protein interactions by network embedding. in Bioinformatics (2013).
                    doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt208.
           46.      Petranovic, D. & Nielsen, J. Can yeast systems biology contribute to the understanding of human
                    disease? Trends Biotechnol. 26, 584–590 (2008).
           47.      Smith, M. G. & Snyder, M. Yeast as a Model for Human Disease. Curr. Protoc. Hum. Genet. 48,
                    (2006).
           48.      Hart, G. T., Ramani, A. K. & Marcotte, E. M. How complete are current yeast and human protein-
                    interaction networks? Genome Biol. 7, (2006).
           49.      Ruff, K. M. & Pappu, R. V. AlphaFold and Implications for Intrinsically Disordered Proteins.
                    Journal of Molecular Biology (2021) doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167208.
           50.      Muscoloni, A., Thomas, J. M., Ciucci, S., Bianconi, G. & Cannistraci, C. V. Machine learning
                    meets complex networks via coalescent embedding in the hyperbolic space. Nat. Commun. (2017)
                    doi:10.1038/s41467-017-01825-5.
           51.      Cannistraci, C. V. & Muscoloni, A. Geometrical congruence, greedy navigability and myopic
                    transfer in complex networks and brain connectomes. Nat. Commun. (2022) doi:10.1038/s41467-
                    022-34634-6.
           52.      Pržulj, N., Corneil, D. G. & Jurisica, I. Modeling interactome: Scale-free or geometric?
                    Bioinformatics (2004) doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bth436.
           53.      Wang, J. Z., Du, Z., Payattakool, R., Yu, P. S. & Chen, C.-F. A new method to measure the
                    semantic similarity of GO terms. Bioinformatics 23, 1274–1281 (2007).
           54.      Yu, G. et al. GOSemSim: an R package for measuring semantic similarity among GO terms and
                    gene products. Bioinformatics 26, 976–978 (2010).
           55.      Huang, D. W., Sherman, B. T. & Lempicki, R. A. Systematic and integrative analysis of large
                    gene lists using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat. Protoc. 4, 44–57 (2009).
           56.      Huang, D. W., Sherman, B. T. & Lempicki, R. A. Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




                    the comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, 1–13 (2009).
           57.      Mirdita, M. et al. ColabFold: making protein folding accessible to all. Nat. Methods 19, 679–682
                    (2022).
           58.      Erdos, G., Pajkos, M. & Dosztányi, Z. IUPred3: Prediction of protein disorder enhanced with
                    unambiguous experimental annotation and visualization of evolutionary conservation. Nucleic
                    Acids Res. (2021) doi:10.1093/nar/gkab408.


           Acknowledgements
           We thank: Yi Huang (Tsinghua University) and Daniele Macuglia (Peking University)
           for the comments and for proofreading the article; the Center for Information Services
           and High Performance Computing (ZIH) of the TU Dresden and ScaDS.AI for
           providing HPC resources; the BIOTEC System Administrators for their IT support;
           Sabine Zeissig for the administrative assistance at BIOTEC; Yue Wu, YuanYuan Song,
           Yining Xin, Giada Zhou, Shao Qian Yi, Lixia Huang, and Weijie Guan for the
           administrative support at THBI; Hao Pang for the IT support at THBI.


           Funding
           Work in the CVC’s Biomedical Cybernetics Lab was supported by the independent
           research group leader running funding of the Technische Universität Dresden. Work in
           the CVC’s Center for Complex Network Intelligence is supported by the Zhou Yahui
           Chair professorship of Tsinghua University, the starting funding of the Tsinghua
           Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence, and the National High-level Talent Program of
           the Ministry of Science and Technology of China.


           Author Contributions
           CVC proposed the definition of Network Shape Intelligence (NSI) and conceived the
           theory, the experiments and the content of the study. AM and CVC designed the
           algorithm, the computational experiments, figures and items for the CH network
           automata section, and IA realized them. IA and CVC designed the algorithm, the
           computational experiments, figures and items for the CH network automata versus
           AFM comparison section, and IA realized them. CVC invented the BFEM. IA
           hypothesized the relation between IDR and mis-predictions of AFM, and CVC
           designed the statistical procedure to prove it. IA performed the computational
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           experiments and prepared the code to implement them. ML and UM optimized the setup
           of AlfaFold2 on high performance computing systems and DMR guided IA in job
           submission. IA and CVC analyzed and interpreted the results. CVC wrote the article
           and the supplementary information including notes of IA, and corrections from the
           other authors. CVC planned, directed and supervised the study.


           Competing interests
           The authors declare no competing interests.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           Figures and legends




           Figure 1. Cannistraci-Hebb epitopological rationale and network automata on paths of length 2, 3
           and n.
           Examples for local topological link prediction performed using the (a) L2 or (b) L3 Cannistraci-Hebb
           epitopological rationale. The two black nodes represent the seed nodes whose nonobserved interaction
           should be scored with a likelihood. The white nodes are the L2 or L3 common-neighbours (CNs) of the
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           seed nodes, further neighbours are not shown for simplicity. The different types of links are reported
           with different colours: non-LCL (nLCL, green), external-LCL (eLCL, red), internal-LCL (iLCL, white).
           The cohort of common-neighbours and the iLCL (white links) form the local community only if the
           external links (red links) are minimized, which is the Cannistraci-Hebb epitopological rationale and the
           necessary condition to be a Cannistraci-Hebb network automaton. The set of (c) L2 and (d) L3 paths
           related to the given examples of local communities are shown. (e) Mathematical definitions of
           Cannistraci-Hebb network automata on path of length 2 (L2), 3 (L3) and n (Ln). Notation: 𝑢, 𝑣 are the
           seed nodes; 𝑧 is the intermediate node (CN); 𝑑𝑧 is the degree of 𝑧; 𝑑𝑖𝑧 is the internal degree (number
           of iLCL) of 𝑧; 𝑑𝑒𝑧 is the external degree (number of eLCL) of 𝑧; 𝑑 ∗ = 1 + 𝑑.




           Figure 2. Comparing PPI predictions of network shape intelligence methods
           For each network, 10% of links were randomly removed (10 repetitions) and the algorithms were
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           executed to assign likelihood scores to the non-observed links in the reduced networks. To evaluate the
           performance, the links are ranked by likelihood scores and the precision is computed as the percentage
           of removed links among the top-r in the ranking, for each r from 1 up to 100 at steps of 1. The barplots
           show the average (on 10 repetitions) area under precision curve (AUP) and its standard error. The color
           of the CH bars varies depending on the average AUP value: the higher the average AUP is, the redder the
           CH bars appear. A red or black arrow is displayed on the top-right of the subplot, indicating the
           percentage increment between the best CH method and RA-L3. If the arrow is not present, there is not
           increment. A permutation test for the mean AUP has been conducted and an asterisk next to the arrow
           indicates significant statistical difference (p-value ≤ 0.05). The networks are ordered (top-down, left-
           right) by decreasing percentage increment and, in case of tie, by increasing p-value between the two
           methods.




           Figure 3. Comparing the performance of CH and AFM in predicting random 10%GSP+10%GSN
           protein interactions of the Yeast DIP network.
           Considering CH and AFM methods, the test involves predicting 10% positive and 10% negative
           interactions in the Yeast DIP network, which are randomly sampled from the GSP (Gold Standard
           Positives) and GSN (Gold Standard Negatives), respectively. To evaluate the performance, the links are
           sorted based on the predicted likelihood scores, and AUC-ROC and AUC-PR are computed for the entire
           sorted list of links. For each evaluation measure, the barplots report the mean performance (with error
           bars for standard error which is negligible) of each method on 10 realizations. The color of the CH bars
           varies depending on the performance value: the higher the performance is, the redder the CH bars appear.
           The arrows highlight the percentage of improvement between the best CH method and AFM methods as
             𝐶𝐻−𝐴𝐹𝑀
                         × 100.
           𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝐶𝐻,𝐴𝐹𝑀)
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.10.552825; this version posted August 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
 (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
                                        made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.




           Figure 4. Interaction disorder index and computation time of CH and AFM.
           The probability density functions of the interaction disorder index for protein pairs in the entire (4476
           interactions) golden standards positive (GSP, left panels) and the entire (4476 interactions) negative
           (GSN, right panels) sets predicted by AFM methods (a-d), and CH3-L3 (e-f). The solid line indicates
           correctly predicted interactions while the dashed line represents wrongly predicted interactions. The
           vertical line indicates the location of the median for each probability density function. (g) Average time
           to compute all variants of CH and AFM to predict one interaction. (h) Estimated time to compute CH
           variants and AFM variants to predict all the missing interactions. On top of each bar, min stands for
           minutes and cent for centuries.
